The Journal of Clinical Investigation    CLINICAL MEDICINE1
Introduction
The human killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIRs) are a 
family of inhibitory and activating receptors. They are expressed 
predominantly by NK cells but are also found on T cells in a sub -
set-specific manner (1, 2). Mice have functional analogs (the Ly49 
receptors) but no orthologs, and there are significant differences 
between KIR and Ly49, in both structure and tissue distribution 
(3). The inhibitory KIRs (iKIRs) are characterized by long cyto -plasmic tails, which contain immunoreceptor tyrosine-based 
inhibitory motifs (ITIMs) that, upon iKIR ligation, become phos-
phorylated and recruit tyrosine phosphatases (1) . The ligands for 
the iKIR include HLA class I molecules, which iKIRs recognize in 
broad allotypes, e.g., KIR2DL1 binds HLA C molecules carrying 
the C2 motif (lysine at position 80) (4–6) . The presence of iKIR- 
ligand pairs is necessary for functional activity; however, iKIRs 
and their HLA ligands are encoded on different chromosomes 
and are thus inherited independently. Therefore, within any given 
individual, not all iKIRs will necessarily have a matching ligand. 
In an individual carrying a particular iKIR gene as well as an HLA 
class I allele that can serve as its ligand (i.e., an iKIR-ligand gene 
pair), that iKIR is referred to as “functional” (e.g., presence of 
KIR2DL1 in an individual positive for an HLA C2 group allele). A 
“nonfunctional” iKIR is one that is carried in the absence of such a 
ligand (e.g., the presence of KIR2DL1 in an individual negative for 
all HLA C2 group alleles). Individuals differ in the number of func-
tional iKIR genes they carry, which can vary between 0 and 4. Fur-BACKGROUND. There is increasing evidence, in transgenic mice and in vitro, that inhibitory killer cell immunoglobulin-
like receptors (iKIRs) can modulate T cell responses. Furthermore, we have previously shown that iKIRs are an important 
determinant of T cell–mediated control of chronic viral infection and that these results are consistent with an increase in the 
CD8+ T cell lifespan due to iKIR-ligand interactions. Here, we tested this prediction and investigated whether iKIRs affect T cell 
lifespan in humans in vivo.
METHODS.  We used stable isotope labeling with deuterated water to quantify memory CD8+ T cell survival in healthy 
individuals and patients with chronic viral infections.
RESULTS.  We showed that an individual’s iKIR-ligand genotype was a significant determinant of CD8+ T cell lifespan: in 
individuals with 2 iKIR-ligand gene pairs, memory CD8+ T cells survived, on average, for 125 days; in individuals with 4 iKIR-
ligand gene pairs, the memory CD8+ T cell lifespan doubled to 250 days. Additionally, we showed that this survival advantage 
was independent of iKIR expression by the T cell of interest and, further, that the iKIR-ligand genotype altered the CD8+ and 
CD4+ T cell immune aging phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS. Together, these data reveal an unexpectedly large effect of iKIR genotype on T cell survival.
FUNDING. Wellcome Trust; Medical Research Council; EU Horizon 2020; EU FP7; Leukemia and Lymphoma Research; National 
Institute of Health Research (NIHR) Imperial Biomedical Research Centre; Imperial College Research Fellowship; National 
Institutes of Health; Jefferiss Trust.KIR-HLA interactions extend human CD8+ T cell 
lifespan in vivo
Yan Zhang,1 Ada W.C. Yan,2 Lies Boelen,2 Linda Hadcocks,1 Arafa Salam,1 Daniel Padrosa Gispert,2 Loiza Spanos,1,3 Laura Mora Bitria,2 
Neda Nemat-Gorgani,4 James A. Traherne,5 Chrissy Roberts,6 Danai Koftori,2 Graham P . Taylor,2,7 Daniel Forton,1,8 Paul J. Norman,4,9 
Steven G.E. Marsh,10,11 Robert Busch,3 Derek C. Macallan,1 and Becca Asquith2
1Institute for Infection and Immunity, St George’s, University of London, London, United Kingdom. 2Department of Infectious Disease, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom. 3School of Life 
and Health Sciences, University of Roehampton, London, United Kingdom. 4Department of Structural Biology and Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, California, USA. 5Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. 6Department of Clinical Research, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, 
United Kingdom. 7National Centre for Human Retrovirology, St Mary’s Hospital, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom. 8Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, St 
George’s University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom. 9Department of Biomedical Informatics and Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado School of 
Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA. 10Anthony Nolan Research Institute, Royal Free Hospital, London, United Kingdom. 11UCL Cancer Institute, UCL, London, United Kingdom.
  Related Commentary: https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI171027
Authorship note: YZ, AWCY , and LB are co–first authors. RB, DCM, and BA contributed 
equally to this work.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Copyright: © 2023, Zhang et al. This is an open access article published under the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.
Submitted: February 6, 2023; Accepted: April 5, 2023; Published: June 15, 2023.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2023;133(12):e169496. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI169496.The Journal of Clinical Investigation    CLINICAL MEDICINE2
 J Clin Invest. 2023;133(12):e169496  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI169496found that CD8+ T cell survival was significantly affected by the 
iKIR-HLA genotype (specifically, the number of functional iKIR 
genes) but not by iKIR expression on the measured T cell. Comple -
mentary genetic and immunophenotypic data showed additional 
evidence that the iKIR-HLA genotype influences immune T cell 
aging. Our results indicate that iKIRs have a profound impact on 
T cell survival and are most consistent with an indirect pathway.
Results
iKIR expression on CD4+ and CD8+ T cells is low and not significantly 
increased by chronic virus infection. iKIR expression on T cells has 
previously been shown to be low in healthy individuals (2) but 
increased in individuals with untreated HIV-1 infection (24). We 
started by quantifying iKIR expression on T cells from individuals 
in our cohorts. Our first cohort (cohort 1, who subsequently par-
ticipated in labeling studies) consisted of individuals with treated 
HIV-1 infection (all with a low, often undetectable viral load; n = 
7), individuals with viremic, untreated, chronic HCV infection (n 
= 9), and individuals with chronic HTLV-1 infection (n = 3), as well 
as uninfected individuals (n = 4). We quantified the proportion of 
CD4+ and CD8+ T cell subsets that expressed KIR2DL1, KIR2DL2/
L3, and KIR3DL1 by flow cytometry and identified the factors 
associated with iKIR expression (see Methods and Supplemental 
Figure 1; supplemental material available online with this article; 
https:/ /doi.org/10.1172/JCI169496DS1).
In general, we observed low iKIR expression across T cell sub -
sets (median 4.7% for CD8+ T cells and 0.3% for CD4+ T cells), 
although expression varied markedly among individuals. To identify 
the determinants of iKIR expression on T cells, we performed mul-
tivariate stepwise regression with the following predictors: age, sex, 
CMV serostatus, cell phenotype (CD4, CD8), T cell differentiation 
status (as an ordinal), infection status (uninfected, HIV-1, HTLV-1, 
HCV), and iKIR (KIR2DL1, KIR2DL2/L3, KIR3DL1). We found that 
iKIR expression increased significantly according to the cell differ-
entiation stage (P  = 4 × 10–14), was higher for KIR2DL2/L3 than for 
KIR2DL1 (P  = 4 × 10–12), and was higher for CD8+ T cells than for 
CD4+ T cells but was not significantly increased by viral infection 
(either when considered separately or when pooled to increase the 
power) (Figure 2 and Supplemental Tables 1 and 2). The lack of asso -
ciation between iKIR expression and HIV-1 status and HTLV-1 status 
was perhaps not unexpected, since the HIV-1–infected participants 
were aviremic (on antiretroviral treatment), and HTLV-1 infection is 
known to be largely latent (25) . However, we were surprised that iKIR 
expression by T cells was not elevated in the HCV-infected partici-
pants, who were all chronically viremic. To verify this absence of an 
effect of HCV infection, we recruited a second, larger independent 
cohort (cohort 2) consisting of 33 uninfected controls and 15 individ-
uals living with HCV and repeated the analysis. The results were very 
similar to our findings in the first cohort, with the cell differentiation 
stage (P  = 4 × 10–17), CD8 phenotype (P  = 0.002), and KIR2DL2/3 
(P = 7 × 10–35) all significant predictors of high iKIR expression. HCV 
infection and CMV infection remained nonsignificant (P  = 0.2, P  = 
0.7 , respectively) (Supplemental Figure 2 and Supplemental Table 2).
Our results confirm previous findings (2) that only a minori-
ty of T cells express iKIR in healthy individuals and extend them, 
showing that iKIR expression remained low in individuals with 
chronic viral infection.ther complexity is added by allelic polymorphism of KIR genes, 
which affects protein structure and thus the affinity for HLA class 
I molecules, as well as protein expression (7).
We have previously found that the number of functional iKIR 
genes that a person carries significantly impacts CD8+ T cell–medi-
ated control of viral infection (8) . We investigated 11 well-docu-
mented CD8+ T cell–mediated HLA class I disease associations in 
HIV-1, hepatitis C virus (HCV), and human T cell leukemia virus 
(HTLV-1) infections and found that, in every case, the HLA asso -
ciation was considerably stronger in individuals with a high num-
ber of functional iKIR genes than in those with a low number. We 
showed that this was true for both protective and detrimental HLA 
class I disease associations. Mathematical modeling showed that 
this apparently contradictory observation could be explained if 
iKIR-ligand interactions increased the survival of CD8+ T cells (8) .
This model prediction is consistent with the growing literature 
showing that, in iKIR-transgenic mice and in human cells in vitro, 
iKIR ligation can indeed affect CD8+ T cell survival (9–12). The 
underlying mechanisms can be divided into 2 groups, which we 
refer to as direct and indirect (Figure 1 ). Both represent plausible 
explanations for the enhancement of HLA class I associations by 
functional iKIR that we have previously observed (8).
Under the direct mechanism (Figure 1A ), ligation of iKIRs 
expressed on the surface of T cells helps to protect that T cell from 
activation-induced cell death. This phenomenon was demonstrated 
by Ugolini et al., who showed that, in transgenic mice expressing a 
human iKIR (KIR2DL3) and its corresponding ligand (HLA-C*03), 
the iKIR-expressing T cells had a survival advantage that was absent 
in mice transgenic just for the iKIR or just for the HLA ligand (9) . Con-
sistent with this finding, human KIR+ T cell clones have been shown 
to express high levels of the antiapoptotic molecule Bcl2 (13) . Further-
more, in vitro coculturing of activated human iKIR–expressing T cell 
clones with B cell lines expressing the corresponding cognate ligand 
promoted T cell survival, an effect that was blocked by both iKIR-spe -
cific antibodies and HLA class I–specific antibodies (8) . However, 
previous studies suggest that iKIRs are only expressed on a relatively 
small proportion of predominantly late-stage differentiated T cells 
(2), raising doubt as to whether such large effects on HLA associa -
tions could be achieved through such a small subset of cells.
The indirect mechanisms (Figure 1B ) comprise a broader set 
of pathways, whereby iKIR expression on another cell (e.g., an NK 
cell or a different T cell) affects the T cell lifespan. Mechanisms 
within this category include NK cell interactions with DCs, which 
subsequently affect T cell responses during priming (14) , NK kill-
ing of activated CD4+ and CD8+ T cells (10–12), and suppression 
of T cells by a recently-described population of iKIR-expressing 
regulatory CD8+ T cells (15, 16) .
The aim of this study is to address 3 questions: (a) Do iKIRs 
increase CD8+ T cell lifespan in humans in vivo? (b) If iKIRs do 
increase lifespan, then what is the size of the effect in humans? (c) 
Are the data most compatible with a direct or indirect mechanism?
Stable isotope labeling is the gold standard for investigating 
cell dynamics in humans (17–22). Here, we used stable isotope 
labeling with deuterated water (2H2O) to quantify the in vivo sur-
vival of CD8+ T central memory (Tcm) and effector memory T 
cells expressing CD45RA (Temra) in individuals living with HIV-
1, HCV, or HTLV-1 as well as in uninfected controls (17 , 23) . We The Journal of Clinical Investigation    CLINICAL MEDICINE3
 J Clin Invest. 2023;133(12):e169496  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI169496low or absent cell frequencies), then cells that were iKIR– were 
collected instead (Supplemental Figure 1B ). Deuterium enrich-
ment in the DNA of monocytes and sorted T cell subpopulations 
was measured by gas chromatography /mass spectrometry (23) . 
Mathematical models were fitted to the data in order to estimate 
the lifespan of the different T cell subsets (Figures 3 and 4, Sup -
plemental Table 4 , and see Methods).
The aim of the study was 3-fold: (a) To test whether iKIR 
(expression or genotype) was a determinant of T cell survival; (b) 
to quantify the impact of iKIR on T cell lifespan; and (c) to deter-
mine which of the 2 pathways, direct or indirect, was most likely. 
The study was designed so that the 2 different pathways (sum-
marized in Figure 1 ) would give 2 distinct patterns to the data 
(Figure 5, A –D). If the direct pathway operates, in which iKIRs 
expressed directly on a CD8+ T cell increases that particular T 
cell’s lifespan when ligated (Figure 1A ), then, in a paired, with-
in-individual study, we would predict that the cells expressing 
functional iKIRs would live longer than cells that were iKIR– or 
expressing nonfunctional iKIRs (Figure 5A). But in a between-in-
dividuals study, we would predict no relationship between the 
iKIR genotype (specifically the number of iKIR-HLA ligand 
gene pairs carried by the individual) and T cell lifespan. This is 
because the data include measurements not just of cells express-
ing functional iKIRs but also of cells that express no iKIR and 
cells that express nonfunctional iKIRs, both of which would 
obscure any signal coming from cells expressing functional iKIR. 
Furthermore, even within those populations of cells that express 
functional iKIRs, there is no reason to expect a positive correla -
tion (i.e., given that a cell expresses functional iKIRs, there is no 
reason to expect the number of functional iKIR genes to affect 
its lifespan further) (Figure 5B). Conversely, if an indirect mech-
anism dominates (Figure 1B ), then iKIR expression on the mea -
sured CD8+ T cell would be irrelevant, and thus we would pre -
dict that there would be no relationship between functional iKIR 
expression and cell survival within individuals (Figure 5C), but 
when we analyze between individuals, we would predict that the 
number of iKIR-ligand gene pairs carried by the individual would 
be positively correlated with CD8+ T cell lifespan (Figure 5D). 
Previous work has shown that different CD8 memory /effector T 
cell subsets have different lifespans (17) ; thus, in order to rule out 
confounding effects of memory /effector cell differentiation, we 
performed the analysis for matched subsets.iKIR-ligand genotype strongly determines the T cell lifespan in 
vivo. To assess the impact of iKIR on CD8+ T cell survival in vivo, 
we used stable isotope labeling. Individuals in cohort 1 (n  = 23, 
above) received 7 weeks of deuterated “heavy” water (2H2O) (see 
Methods); serial saliva and blood samples were taken during 
and up to 112 days after the start of labeling. Monocytes were 
extracted as a rapidly turning over reference population (see 
Methods and Supplemental Figures 3–5 and Supplemental Table 
3). The remaining PBMCs were FACS sorted into CD8+ Tcm 
and CD8+ Temra cells on the basis of cell-surface expression of 
canonical T cell differentiation markers (Tcm: CD45RA–CD28+; 
Temra: CD45RA+CD28+). For all individuals, the KIR and HLA 
genotype was determined prior to sorting, allowing us to estab -
lish bespoke individual gating strategies. This enabled us to fur-
ther sort both CD8 subsets into cells (Tcm or Temra) expressing 
functional iKIRs (i.e., iKIRs whose corresponding ligand was 
encoded by the individual’s HLA alleles) and cells expressing 
nonfunctional iKIRs (iKIRs in an individual who was negative 
for all HLA alleles encoding the corresponding ligands). When 
cells expressing nonfunctional iKIRs were not available (due to 
Figure 1. The direct and indirect pathways that could explain iKIR 
enhancement of CD8+ T cell survival. iKIRs (purple) could increase T 
cell survival and lead to an enhancement of HLA class associations by a 
number of different pathways. In all diagrams, the HLA class I molecule 
associated with disease outcome is shown in yellow and is labeled “HLA 
risk molecule” (interacting with the TCR in blue), and the HLA molecule 
acting as the iKIR ligand is shown in red. (A ) Direct hypothesis: iKIR 
expression on antigen-specific CD8+ T cells reduces activation-induced 
cell death and increases T cell lifespan upon ligation of the cognate KIR 
ligand. (B ) Indirect hypotheses: iKIR ligation on other cells can affect 
CD8+ T cell lifespan through a range of mechanisms. (a)  NK cells can 
interact with DCs and shape downstream T cell responses. (b)  NK cells 
can directly kill activated CD4+ T cells. (c)  Similarly, activated CD8+ T cells 
are also susceptible to NK cell killing. (d)  Regulatory KIR+ CD8+ T cells can 
kill activated antigen-specific CD8+ T cells.The Journal of Clinical Investigation    CLINICAL MEDICINE4
 J Clin Invest. 2023;133(12):e169496  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI169496iate regression to test whether expression of functional iKIRs 
predicted the T cell lifespan (with covariates: cell subpopula -
tion [Tcm or Temra], infection status [HIV-1/HCV /HTLV-1/
control]) also showed that expression of 1 or more functional 
iKIRs was not a significant predictor of T cell lifespan (P  = 0.34, 
linear multivariate regression, Supplemental Results 1 and Sup -
plemental Table 5A ).
The iKIR-ligand gene pairs count is a highly significant predictor 
of CD8+ T cell lifespan (between-individuals comparison). Next, we 
investigated whether, between individuals, an individual’s iKIR 
and HLA genotype (specifically the count of iKIR–HLA ligand gene 
pairs in their genome) was a significant predictor of T cell lifespan. 
In linear multivariate regression (with covariates: cell subpop -
ulation [Tcm or Temra], infection status [HIV-1/HCV /HTLV-1/
control]), the iKIR-ligand gene pair count was a significant deter-Expression of functional iKIRs is not a significant predictor 
of CD8+ T cell lifespan (within-individual comparison). First, we 
investigated whether a CD8+ T cell’s lifespan is influenced by 
its expression of functional iKIRs (i.e., iKIR expression in which 
the individual carried 1 or more alleles encoding the ligand). 
We estimated the lifespan of a total of 54 subsets of T cells 
from 18 individuals (Figures 3 and 4, and Supplemental Table 
4) and assessed whether Tcm and Temra expressing functional 
iKIRs had a longer lifespan than matched Tcm and Temra cells 
from the same individual expressing only nonfunctional iKIRs 
or matched Tcm and Temra cells that were iKIR–. We found no 
evidence that T cell lifespan was determined by functional iKIR 
expression (P  = 0.79, 2-tailed Wilcoxon; Figure 5E ). Repeating 
the analysis excluding the iKIR– T cells did not change the con-
clusion (P  = 0.82, 2-tailed Wilcoxon). Furthermore, a multivar-
Figure 2. Percentage of T cells expressing different inhibitory KIRs (cohort 1). The percentage of cells in each subpopulation that expressed each of 3 dif -
ferent iKIRs was quantified by flow cytometry for the participants in cohort 1 (n = 23). Multivariate regression analysis found that the following were highly 
significant predictors of increased iKIR expression: a more advanced cell differentiation stage (expressed as an ordinal), P = 4 × 10–14, CD8 coexpression P 
= 0.0007 and KIR2DL2/L3 P = 4 × 10–12; male sex was weakly predictive (P = 0.049). CMV serostatus and infection status were not significant predictors of 
iKIR expression. Note that the scale of the y axis is different between the rows. Boxes show the median and IQRs. The corresponding data are provided in 
Supplemental Table 1, and the details of the multivariate regression are given in Supplemental Table 2. n = 7 hypotheses tested. P value threshold for α = 
0.05 is P = 0.009 (permutation test).The Journal of Clinical Investigation    CLINICAL MEDICINE5
 J Clin Invest. 2023;133(12):e169496  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI169496— a doubling in survival. Inclusion of the covariates age, sex, CMV 
serostatus, and viral load did not change this conclusion. We had 
excluded from this analysis any individuals carrying alleles encod-
ing the classical KIR3DL2 ligands (HLA-A *03 and HLA-A *11), as 
there is evidence that the behavior of KIR3DL2, a framework KIR 
with an additional ITIM motif in its cytoplasmic tail, might be 
different from that of the other iKIRs (26–28). When we included 
these individuals, the overall conclusions were unchanged, but the 
size of the effect was slightly smaller (Est = +0.38, P  = 2 × 10-5), con-minant of T cell survival (Figure 5F) (estimate [Est] = +0.41, P  = 
3.4 × 10–6; n = 54 T cell subsets from 18 individuals, Supplemental 
Results 2, Supplemental Table 5B ). As well as being highly statisti-
cally significant, the size of the effect was striking: in an individual 
with 2 iKIR-ligand pairs in their genome, after correcting for viral 
infection and cell phenotype (i.e., for the baseline of Tcm cells in an 
uninfected individual), their memory CD8+ T cells lived, on aver-
age, for 125 days; in contrast, in an individual with 4 iKIR-ligand 
pairs in their genome, their memory CD8+ T cells lived for 250 days 
Figure 3. Label enrichment in CD8+ T cell subpopulations expressing functional iKIRs. Plots show, for each individual, the label enrichment in the 
DNA of sorted T cell subpopulations during and following labeling for 49 days. CD8+ Tcm and Temra cells were sorted on the basis of their iKIR expres -
sion and the individual’s HLA ligand genotype into functional iKIR (Func KIR) (cells expressing an iKIR, in which the individual carried 1 or more allele 
encoding a ligand); nonfunctional iKIR (Non Func KIR) (cells expressing an iKIR whose ligand is absent from the genome); and KIR– (KIR Neg) (not 
expressing any of the iKIRs studied). This figure depicts label enrichment in cells expressing functional iKIRs; the remaining data are shown in Figure 
4. Circles represent data, and the blue line indicates the best fit of the model to the data. Because of low or absent cell frequencies, it was not possible 
to collect all cell populations for all individuals.The Journal of Clinical Investigation    CLINICAL MEDICINE6
 J Clin Invest. 2023;133(12):e169496  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI169496sistent with the idea that KIR3DL2 is distinct from the other inhib -
itory KIRs. Previously, we have also used the inhibitory score (the 
count of functional iKIRs weighted by strength of the KIR-ligand 
interaction) as a predictor. Here, the count and the score (which are 
strongly correlated) performed similarly, and there was no signif -
icant benefit of one over the other (P  = 0.09, Davidson-MacKin-
non J test, Supplemental Results 3). In contrast, counting only the 
number of iKIRs, without considering the presence of the ligand, 
performed significantly worse (P  = 9 × 10–5, Davidson-MacKinnon J 
test, Supplemental Results 3), indicating that ligation of the iKIR is 
essential for the increase in T cell lifespan.
Comparing the results (Figure 5, E and F) with the predictions 
of the 2 different pathways (Figure 5, A–D ), it can be seen that the 
observed impact of iKIR expression and genotype on T cell surviv-
al is most consistent with the indirect pathway.One possible caveat to this conclusion in favor of the indi-
rect pathway was that if cells upregulated and downregulated 
iKIRs rapidly during the course of the labeling experiment, then 
the cells sorted ex vivo as expressing functional iKIRs might 
actually have been iKIR– or expressing nonfunctional iKIRs in 
vivo and vice versa. This could potentially disguise any asso -
ciation between T cell lifespan and functional iKIR expression 
between individuals. However, the proportion of Tcm and Tem-
ra cells that expressed iKIRs was low (Figure 2). We calculate 
that, for differences in this small population of T cells (medi-
an 6% of Tcm and Temra) to be responsible for the doubling 
in the bulk T cell lifespan seen between individuals, then iKIR 
expression would need to increase the survival of this minori-
ty cell population by nearly 20-fold (Supplemental Results 4). 
Furthermore, as argued above, we would not expect the direct 
Figure 4. Label enrichment in CD8+ T cell subpopulations that only express nonfunctional iKIRs or are iKIR–. Plots show, for each individual, the label 
enrichment in the DNA of sorted T cell subpopulations during and following labeling for 49 days. CD8+ Tcm and Temra cells were sorted on the basis of 
their iKIR expression and the individual’s HLA ligand genotype into functional iKIRs (Func KIR) (expressing an iKIR in an individual carrying 1 or more 
alleles encoding a ligand), nonfunctional iKIRs (Non Func) (cells expressing an iKIR whose ligand is absent from the genome), and KIR– (KIR Neg) (not 
expressing any of the iKIRs studied). This figure depicts label enrichment in cells expressing only nonfunctional iKIRs or that were iKIR– (the remaining 
data are in Figure 3). Circles represent data, and the blue line indicates the best fit of the model to the data. Because of low or absent cell frequencies, it 
was not possible to collect cells of all populations for all individuals.The Journal of Clinical Investigation    CLINICAL MEDICINE7
 J Clin Invest. 2023;133(12):e169496  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI169496pathway to generate a correlation between the functional iKIR 
count and the CD8+ T cell lifespan. In particular, the fraction 
of iKIR+ CD8+ T cells would need to be significantly positive -
ly correlated with the number of iKIR-ligand gene pairs, which 
we did not observe (Spearman’s R [Rs] = –0.08, P  = 0.77 , data 
not shown). Similarly, there was no strong correlation between the fraction of CD8+ T cells expressing functional iKIRs and the 
number of iKIR-ligand gene pairs (Rs = +0.23, P  = 0.42, data 
not shown). These observations further support the suggestion 
that the indirect rather than the direct mechanism is operating.
iKIR expression and T cell activation. We also assessed Ki67 
expression in cohort 2 as a complementary approach to assess the Figure 5. Predicted and observed relation -
ship between iKIRs and T cell lifespan. 
(A and B) Sketches of hypothetical data 
that depict predicted patterns in the data 
within individuals and between individ-
uals, respectively, if the direct pathway 
operates. (C and D) Hypothetical data 
depicting predicted patterns within and 
between individuals if the indirect path-
way operates. (E and F) Actual observed 
results within and between individuals. 
(E) n = 21 paired data sets. (F) n = 53 data 
points from 18 individuals. Boxes show the 
median and IQRs with all individual data 
points superimposed. It can be seen that 
the observed results are most consistent 
with the indirect pathway. Note that for 
the between-individuals comparison, 
the T cell lifespan has been adjusted (by 
linear regression coefficients) to allow for 
infection status of the individual and for 
cell subpopulation type (Tcm or Temra). 
This is not necessary for the within-indi-
viduals comparison, as this comparison 
is internally controlled (i.e., both points 
would be adjusted by the same factor, as 
both points come from the same individ-
ual and the same cell subpopulation (Tem 
or Temra). We found that the CD8+ T cell 
lifespan was independent of functional 
iKIR expression (P = 0.79, paired Wilcoxon 
test) and indeed was independent of iKIR 
expression in general (P = 0.50, paired 
Wilcoxon). In contrast, the CD8+ T cell 
lifespan was significantly determined by 
iKIR-HLA genotype (P = 3 × 10–6, multivari-
ate regression).
The Journal of Clinical Investigation    CLINICAL MEDICINE8
 J Clin Invest. 2023;133(12):e169496  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI169496tively). Although this correlation is between CD57 expression and 
an individual’s age rather than cell age per se, the two are likely to 
be linked, and henceforth we used the proportion of cells express-
ing CD57 as a surrogate of that population’s age.
On this basis, we predicted that in individuals in whom the 
functional iKIR count is high, the proportion of cells expressing 
CD57 will be high and that the effect would be most pronounced 
in older individuals, in whom the effect of the iKIR genotype 
on cell age would have had the longest time to accumulate. We 
therefore recruited a cohort of 63 healthy older adults (age ≥60 
years, cohort 3) and analyzed the proportion of naive/T stem 
cell–like memory (naive/Tscm), early Tcm, late Tcm (also called 
transitional memory), and Tem and Temra CD8+ and CD4+ cells 
expressing CD57 by flow cytometry (Supplemental Figure 10). 
We performed multivariate linear regression with independent 
variables for the functional iKIR gene count, CMV serostatus, 
age, and cell differentiation state. We found that for CD8+ T cells, 
CD57 expression was significantly associated with the function-
al iKIR count (Figure 6, P  = 0.003), with the percentage of cells 
expressing high levels of CD57 increasing by 3% (β = 0.03; Supple -
mental Table 6 ) for each additional functional iKIR in a person’s 
genome. To put this into context, the same magnitude of increase 
in CD57 positivity (3%) was seen with an increase of 12 years in 
an individual’s age. If naive and Tcm cells (which express very low 
levels of CD57) were excluded, then the results were even more 
striking (P  = 0.0005, 7 .8% increase for each additional functional 
iKIR gene; Supplemental Table 7). For CD4+ cells, we observed 
the same trend, but the effect size was smaller (an increase of 
2% for each additional functional iKIR gene) and not significant  
(P = 0.1; Supplemental Table 6 ). Focusing on the T cell subpopu-
lations with sufficient numbers of CD57+ events for accurate anal-
ysis (median ≥150 events), namely CD8+ Tem, CD8+ Temra, and 
CD4+ Tem cells, we found significant associations between CD57 
expression and functional iKIR count in each case (P  = 0.018,  
P = 0.012, P  = 0.036, respectively; Figure 6). We conclude that our 
prediction that CD8+ T cells will be “older” in people with a high 
number of functional iKIR genes is consistent with the data. Inde -
pendent of this interpretation that CD57 expression reflects T cell 
age, these data show that a functional iKIR gene count affects 
both CD8+ and CD4+ T cell immunophenotype.relationship between iKIR expression and proliferation. We found 
significantly higher levels of Ki67 expression in iKIR+ T cell subsets 
when compared with the corresponding iKIR– cells, regardless of 
whether or not the iKIR was functional (Supplemental Figure 6 ). 
We considered 2 possible explanations for this observation. The 
first is that iKIR+ cells were dividing more rapidly than iKIR– cells, 
and the second is that iKIR expression was upregulated tran-
siently in proliferating/ activated cells. The first interpretation is 
inconsistent with the in vivo labeling data. We therefore explored 
the relationship between iKIR expression and T cell activation in 
vitro. We showed that iKIR expression was indeed significantly 
upregulated on CD8+ T cells following stimulation with anti-CD3/
anti-CD28 (α CD3α CD28), that iKIR expression was higher on acti-
vated (CD38+) cells than on quiescent cells (CD38–), and that iKIR 
expression was stable at a cellular level for at least 72 hours (Sup -
plemental Figures 7–9 . This is consistent with work showing upreg -
ulation followed by slow downregulation of iKIRs on human T cell 
clones following activation (29) .
Relationship between the iKIR-ligand gene pair count and CD57 
expression. Intuitively, one would expect that in individuals with 
a high number of iKIR-HLA ligand pairs (i.e., a high functional 
iKIR gene count), in which the survival of CD8+ T cells is elevated, 
the average age of a CD8+ T cell would be increased. This intu-
ition was confirmed by mathematical modeling, which predicted 
a weak relationship between cell survival (and thus the iKIR/HLA 
genotype) and cell age (defined as the time between a cell enter-
ing the memory compartment and sampling; see Methods). To 
test this prediction, we first looked for a cell phenotype that is cor-
related with cell age. It has been reported that expression of CD57 , 
a terminally sulfated glycan carbohydrate epitope, is increased as 
cells age, although it is not a marker of replicative senescence (30, 
31). To test whether CD57 expression can be considered a valid 
surrogate for cell age, we turned to the UK Adult Twin Register 
(TwinsUK), a large cohort of monozygotic and dizygotic twins. 
In a subset of this cohort (n  = 333), immune phenotypes have 
been quantified by flow cytometry alongside metadata, including 
age (32) . We found evidence for a positive correlation between 
an individual’s age and the proportion of CD8+CD45RA+, CD8+ 
CD45RA–, CD4+CD45RA+, and CD4+CD45RA– cells that were 
CD57+ (Spearman test P  = 6 × 10–9, 0.06, 4 × 10–5, 0.0002, respec-
Figure 6. CD57 expression increases with the number of functional iKIR genes carried by an individual. T cell subpopulations with measurable CD57 
expression (median ≥150 events) are plotted. The proportion of cells expressing CD57 was significantly positively correlated with the functional iKIR count 
in CD4+ Tem cells (P = 0.036), CD8+ Tem cells (P = 0.018), and CD8+ Temra cells (P = 0.012). Multivariate regression was done with the age of the individual 
as a covariate (n = 63). Symbols denote experimental measurements, thin horizontal lines the median CD57 expression (for each subpopulation and each 
functional iKIR count), and thick lines the best fits line of regression.The Journal of Clinical Investigation    CLINICAL MEDICINE9
 J Clin Invest. 2023;133(12):e169496  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI169496with our data as well as previous observations; ref. 29 ) but that, 
over a longer time scale (49 days of label administration, approx -
imately 110 days of observation), iKIR expression is not associat -
ed with differences in T cell proliferation. That is, Ki67 is better 
considered as a timestamp of a recently proliferated cell (33) . This 
serves as a caveat against the interpretation of Ki67 as a measure 
of in vivo lifespan and emphasizes the importance of direct in vivo 
measurements such as those made using stable isotopes. This con-
clusion is echoed by animal studies that also showed substantial 
differences between Ki67 expression and more direct measures of 
cell proliferation (34) .
We suggest that, together, these data provide a mechanistic 
explanation for our previous observations that an increased num-
ber of iKIR-HLA ligand gene pairs significantly enhances CD8+ T 
cell–mediated control of virus in HIV-1, HCV, and HTLV-1 infec-
tions. Mathematical modeling showed that these observations 
could be explained if iKIR-ligand interactions increased the sur-
vival of CD8+ T cells (8) . Furthermore, in a longitudinal study of an 
HIV-1–infected cohort, this previous work also showed that pro -
tective HLA-B*57 and detrimental HLA-B*35Px associations were 
both better maintained over time in people with a high number 
of functional iKIR genes compared with people with a low num-
ber, again consistent with the hypothesis that the enhancement of 
HLA associations observed is related to increased T cell survival. 
Very recently, we have found that the number of functional iKIR 
genes also affects HLA associations with the risk of type 1 diabe -
tes (our unpublished observations), suggesting that the process 
we have identified in the context of chronic viral infection is also 
relevant in some cases of autoimmunity. Although it is very early 
to be speculating about therapeutic implications, 2 facts are perti-
nent: first, that this pathway is clinically relevant and second that 
this pathway is druggable. Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) that are 
capable of blocking or activating iKIRs in vitro have been devel-
oped. Lirulimab, a mAb that blocks KIR2DL1 and KIR2DL2/L3, 
has been developed as an NK therapeutic and tested in human 
clinical trials to treat solid tumors and hematologic malignancies 
(35) ; it could potentially be repositioned to alter T cell lifespan. 
Some indirect mechanisms, e.g., an impact of iKIRs on NK cell 
education may be harder to drug, as the effects may have already 
occurred during development. Nevertheless, the requirement 
for NK signaling must still be met for effector function and can 
potentially still be targeted. In the long term, there is, therefore, 
the possibility to modulate T cell responses in vivo by dampen-
ing (by KIR blocking) or boosting (by KIR ligation) T cell survival 
depending on the context.
Another potentially important direction for translation is in 
allo-hematopoietic stem cell transplant donor-recipient match-
ing. Several studies have already considered the effect of donor 
KIR genotype and donor-recipient KIR ligand mismatches on NK 
cell alloreactivity (36–38). Our work suggests that donor NK cell 
autoreactivity may also be relevant. An essential prerequisite for 
translation is a detailed understanding of the underlying mecha -
nism. For this, an animal model would be invaluable. The extent 
to which murine Ly49 receptors adequately model the human 
iKIR is unclear. One step would be to see whether the relation-
ship we observed between the count of functional iKIR genes and 
CD8+ cell lifespan in humans is recapitulated by murine models.Discussion
In this study, we show that the number of iKIR-HLA ligand gene 
pairs that an individual carries in their genome is a significant 
predictor of the lifespan of their memory CD8+ T cells. In addi-
tion to being highly statistically significant (P  = 3 × 10–6), the size 
of the effect was striking: we found that the CD8+ cell lifespan 
increased by approximately 60 days for each additional func-
tional iKIR gene that a person possessed, resulting in a doubling 
in T cell survival for a person with 4 functional iKIR genes com-
pared with a person who has 2 functional iKIR genes. Although 
our previous work had anticipated that iKIR-HLA ligand interac-
tions would increase T cell survival, we still found the size of the 
effect to be unexpectedly large. There are 2 reasons why such 
a large effect is striking. First, the variable we are considering, 
the count of functional iKIR genes, is purely genetic informa -
tion and considers only 2 gene families (KIR and HLA). A very 
large number of other factors, both genetic and environmental, 
would be expected to affect T cell kinetics and to obscure the 
relationship. The fact that the effect was readily evident despite 
such variance emphasizes its importance. Second, the genes 
we consider are, first and foremost, genes that regulate innate 
immunity; that they have such a marked impact on adaptive T 
cell survival is remarkable.
A number of pathways by which functional iKIR could 
enhance CD8+ T cell lifespan have been described in the liter-
ature. We divided these into “direct” and “indirect” pathways 
(Figure 1 ).
The patterns we observed in the data, in particular the strong 
correlation between functional iKIR count and CD8+ T cell lifes-
pan and the absence of any discernible effect of functional iKIR 
expression on a cell’s lifespan, argue in favor of an indirect mech-
anism (Figure 5 ). The direct and indirect mechanisms are not 
mutually exclusive, and, given the existing data suggesting that 
KIR expression can directly affect a cell’s survival in vitro and in 
mice, it is plausible that this also occurs in humans. However, the 
magnitude of the effect was not discernible in our hands, and we 
suggest that the indirect pathway, rather than the direct pathway, 
is the more important determinant of a CD8+ T cell’s lifespan in 
humans in vivo.
We also found that an individual’s functional iKIR gene 
count had a significant effect on immune aging, specifically on 
CD57 expression. CD57 expression is often considered a marker 
of immune aging, although we have previously shown that it is 
not a marker of replicative senescence (31) . In the current study, 
we showed that CD57 expression was not only significantly pos-
itively correlated with functional iKIR count for CD8+ T cells but 
also for CD4+ T cells, hinting that functional iKIRs might also 
impact CD4+ T cell survival. Independent of this interpretation, 
these data point to another important way in which the function-
al iKIR gene count modulates the immunophenotype. Whether 
iKIRs modulate other aspects of T cell dynamics such as clonal 
evolution and diversity is an open question.
We found that iKIR-expressing T cells had higher levels of 
Ki67 expression than did iKIR– T cells, but, by stable isotope label-
ing, there was no difference in the proliferation rates of iKIR+ and 
iKIR– cells measured over the longer term. We suggest that Ki67 
and iKIRs are transiently upregulated upon activation (consistent The Journal of Clinical Investigation    CLINICAL MEDICINE10
 J Clin Invest. 2023;133(12):e169496  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI169496Cohort 3 (CD57 expression analysis) comprised 63 healthy older 
adults (≥60 years of age; range, 60–91 years; median, 75 years), all of 
whom were seronegative for HIV-1, hepatitis B, and HCV infection.
KIR expression analysis. For analysis of cohort 1, CD4+ and CD8+ T cells 
were gated into 4 subpopulations: naive/Tscm (CD45RA+CD28+), Tcm 
(CD45RA–CD28+), Tem (CD45RA–CD28–), and Temra (CD45RA+CD28–) 
(see Supplemental Methods for panel details including clone names and 
Supplemental Figure 1A for representative gating). iKIR antibodies spe -
cific for KIR2DL1, KIR2DL2/L3, and KIR3DL1 were conjugated to dif -
ferent dyes, enabling analysis of coexpression, and cells were analyzed 
and sorted on a BD FACSAria III (BD Biosciences). Cytometric data were 
quantitated using FlowJo.
For analysis of cohort 2, T cell subpopulations were defined as 
above. Phycoerythrin-conjugated (PE-conjugated) iKIR-specific anti-
bodies were used to stain samples separately for each iKIR studied. 
Cells were analyzed on a BD FACSCanto II cytometer (BD Bioscienc-
es) and data were quantified using FlowJo.
CD57 expression analysis. CD4+ and CD8+ T cells were gated as 
described above. To permit higher resolution, Tcm cells were further 
separated into early Tcm and late Tcm cells (also called transitional 
memory [Ttm]) (39)  by CCR7 staining. For enumeration of highly dif -
ferentiated cells, staining with CD57 was performed (see Supplemen-
tal Figure 10 for representative gating).
Stable isotope labeling in vivo. We have previously described the 
isotope labeling protocol in detail (40) . Briefly, participants were 
given oral doses of 70% 2H2O over a 7-week period (50 mL 3 times 
daily for 1 week, then twice daily thereafter). Saliva samples were 
collected for evaluation of body water labeling. Peripheral blood 
was collected at successive time points during and after labeling, 
and PBMCs were separated by Ficoll gradient centrifugation. For 
normalization, monocytes, a cell population expected to reach fully 
labeled status during the labeling phase, were sorted from an ali-
quot of PBMCs by CD14 magnetic bead column positive selection 
(MACS, Miltenyi Biotec). A BD FACSAria III flow cytometer was 
used to sort PBMCs into CD8+ Tcm and CD8+ Temra cells on the 
basis of cell-surface expression of canonical differentiation markers 
(Tcm: CD45RA–CD28+; Temra: CD45RA+CD28–). Both subsets were 
further sorted on the basis of their iKIR expression into cells (Tcm or 
Temra) expressing functional iKIRs and cells expressing nonfunc-
tional iKIRs (if the latter was not available or cell numbers were too 
low, then cells that were iKIR– were collected instead). Cells from 
each individual had a bespoke gating strategy based on their HLA 
and KIR genotype, as each individual had different functional and 
nonfunctional iKIRs. Given the low or absent cell frequencies, it 
was not possible to collect all cell populations for all individuals (see 
Supplemental Figure 1, A and B for representative gating). Deuteri-
um enrichment in the DNA of monocytes and sorted T cell subpop -
ulations was measured by gas chromatography /mass spectrometry 
of the pentafluorobenzyl derivative as previously described (23, 41).
Definition of functional and nonfunctional iKIR expression. We 
used the following rules to define cells expressing functional or 
nonfunctional iKIRs. A cell was classified as expressing function-
al iKIRs if it expressed KIR2DL1, KIR2DL2/L3, and/or KIR3DL1, 
and the individual was positive for any HLA allele encoding a cor-
responding ligand (KIR2DL1: C2; KIR2DL2: C1 [which includes 
HLA-B* 46 and -B*73 ], C2; KIR2DL3: C1 [including HLA-B* 46 and 
-B*73 ]; KIR3DL1: Bw4 [which includes HLA-A *23, -A* 2 4 , and -A* 3 2 , One limitation of this study is that the count of functional iKIR 
genes that we used was relatively simple and did not incorporate 
iKIR allele–level information (other than the broad allotypes of 
KIR2DL2/L3 and KIR3DL1/S1). There are 2 main reasons for the 
decision. First, our aim was to investigate possible mechanisms 
underlying our prior observation that the functional iKIR count 
enhanced HLA class I associations with clinical outcomes, and so 
we needed to use this previous definition of the functional iKIR 
count (which did not include allele-level information) for compa -
rability. Second, it is far from clear how allele-level information 
should be incorporated into the functional count: Should some 
alleles count as less than 1? If so, which alleles and what count 
should they be assigned? Should the “count” of a KIR-HLA allele 
pair only reflect its strength of signaling, or should other factors 
such as the expression level of KIR and HLA also be incorporat -
ed? Our first attempt at incorporating some of these details (the 
weighted inhibitory score) was also a significant predictor of CD8+ 
T cell lifespan but it did not perform better than the unweighted 
count of functional iKIR genes. In stark contrast, a count of the 
number of iKIR genes, without taking into account whether they 
were functional, performed very poorly, as we expected, suggest -
ing that, though simple, there is content in our definition of a func-
tional iKIR gene. Ultimately, a much larger study would be needed 
to interrogate such subtleties in the future.
To summarize, the data presented here show that the iKIR-HLA 
ligand genotype has a profound impact on CD8+ T cell lifespan as 
well as on CD4+ and CD8+ T cell immunophenotype. Furthermore, 
since these are relationships between genotype and phenotypes, 
the direction of causality is unequivocal. Separately, we have also 
shown that the iKIR-ligand genotype has direct and measurable 
consequences for human health, as it affects the risk of developing 
type 1 diabetes, the rate of progression to a low CD4+ count in peo -
ple living with HIV-1, the odds of spontaneous clearance of HCV, 
and the risk of developing inflammatory disease in the context of 
HTLV-1 infection. The wide range of diseases involved and the cen-
tral role of T cells in human immunity suggest that this iKIR impact 
on CD8+ T cell lifespan may be of fundamental importance.
Methods
Experimental data
Study participants . A total of 134 participants across 3 cohorts were 
recruited. Cohort 1 (KIR expression analysis and stable isotope label-
ing) comprised 23 healthy adults including uninfected individuals 
serving as controls (n = 4); individuals with viremic, untreated HCV (n 
= 9); individuals with aviremic, treated HIV-1 (n = 7); and individuals 
with untreated HTLV-1 (n = 3). Individuals with no functional iKIRs 
were excluded from the study (as we needed some functional iKIR 
expression to investigate the direct hypothesis). For the labeling anal-
ysis, the individuals carrying a KIR3DL2 ligand were initially excluded 
(see below), leaving 18 individuals.
Cohort 2 (KIR expression analysis — replication cohort) com-
prised 48 healthy adults, including uninfected individuals serving as 
controls (n = 33) and individuals with viremic, untreated HCV (n = 15). 
Hepatitis C viral loads ranged from 2.4 × 104 to 3.3 × 106, with a median 
of 1.8 × 106 RNA copies/mL. All individuals in cohort 2 were seroneg -
ative for HIV-1 infection.The Journal of Clinical Investigation    CLINICAL MEDICINE11
 J Clin Invest. 2023;133(12):e169496  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI169496body, attained asymptotically), but δ  (the rate of turnover of body 
water per day) was constrained to be the same for everyone (since 
the turnover of body water is expected to be similar among individ-
uals). Replacing the empirical function with a piece-wise function 
gave very similar results.
     (Equation 1)
Next, for each individual, we modeled the fraction of label in a rapidly- 
turning-over cell population (monocytes) in order to estimate the 
amplification factor bw (also referred to as c; ref. 21); this is a factor that 
reflects the increase in M+1 when a cell divides, given enrichment S(t), 
i.e., it scales between label enrichment in newly synthesized DNA and 
precursor availability in body water (17) . We describe the label enrich-
ment in DNA of monocytes (Equation 2) using a previously proposed 
mechanistic model (19, 49):
     (Equation 2)
In Equation 2, LM is the fraction of label in bone marrow monocyte 
precursors, LB is the fraction of label in blood monocytes (the observ-
able), pm is the proliferation rate of precursors, r1 is the rate of exit from 
the mitotic pool in bone marrow, Δ is the time spent in the postmitotic 
pool in bone marrow, M/B is the ratio of the number of monocytes in 
the bone marrow to the number of monocytes in the blood, S(t) is the 
saliva enrichment estimated for that individual in step 1, and bw is the 
amplification factor of interest (see Supplemental Figure 4). We used 
equilibrium constraints to eliminate pm and r1. M/B and Δ were fixed 
at estimates of 2.6 days and 1.6 days, respectively (19, 49) (however, 
we showed that the estimates of bw were independent of these values; 
this follows because bw depends only on the plateau enrichment in 
blood monocytes). Thus, there were 2 free parameters (bw and r2) that 
were estimated by fitting the model to the data; different values were 
allowed for each individual, and we used uniform priors of [0,7] and 
[0,10]  for bw and r2, respectively. Finally, we used the information from 
steps 1 and 2 to describe the label enrichment in T cells. The equations 
for the fraction of label in T cells are as follows:
     (Equation 3)
In Equation 3, L  is the fraction of label in the DNA of the T cell sub -
set at the site of division, p  is the proliferation rate of T cells, S(t)  
is the saliva enrichment estimated in step 1 above, bw is the ampli-
fication factor estimated in step 2 above, d*  is the disappearance 
rate of labeled T cells, O(t) is the observed label at time t , which is 
the label at the site of division (likely lymphoid tissue) lagged by a 
time ΔL to reflect a delay of ΔL days for a T cell to traffic from the together with some other rare HLA-A alleles], using the definitions 
of iKIR ligands provided in the Immuno Polymorphism Database; 
refs. 4, 42 ). A cell was classified as expressing nonfunctional iKIRs 
if it both (a) expressed an iKIR (KIR2DL1, KIR2DL2/L3, and/or 
KIR3DL1) for which the individual did not carry an allele encoding 
any corresponding HLA ligand and (b) did not express any func-
tional iKIR (i.e., we assumed that the signal for a functional iKIR 
was dominant, and this cell would instead be classified as express-
ing functional iKIRs).
In the case in which KIR2DL2 was functional and KIR2DL3 was 
nonfunctional, then cells expressing KIR2DL2/L3 could not be unam-
biguously classified (as either functional or nonfunctional) and thus 
were not collected.
There is evidence that KIR3DL2, a framework KIR, behaves dif -
ferently from the other iKIRs, particularly its exceptionally strong 
binding to HLA-B*27 heavy-chain homodimers and non-HLA ligands 
(2, 26–28, 43, 44), and we were concerned it may confound our results. 
Therefore, for donors negative for the alleles encoding HLA ligands 
of KIR3DL2 (HLA-A *03, A* 1 1 , B*27 ), those cells expressing KIR3DL2 
were excluded from the sorted populations (directed into the dump 
channel), whereas cells from donors that were positive for any of the 
alleles encoding HLA ligands of KIR3DL2 (n = 5) were removed from 
the analysis in the first instance, reducing the cohort size from 23 to 18. 
For the sensitivity analysis including those individuals positive for the 
classical KIR3DL2 ligands HLA-A *03 and - A* 1 1  (n = 2), the cells nega -
tive for KIR3DL2 were included and classified according to the stan-
dard definitions (nonfunctional or iKIR–); cells from other individuals 
kept their original classifications.
In vitro activation studies. PBMCs from 10 healthy donors were 
either cultured in media alone or stimulated with purified anti–
human plate-bound CD3 and soluble CD28 (2 μ g/mL and 1 μ g/
mL, respectively, BD Biosciences). Expression of iKIRs and CD38 
on CD8+ T cells was measured by flow cytometry at 6, 12, and 24 
hours. For iKIR expression, a cocktail of PE-conjugated KIR2DL1-, 
KIR2DL2/L3-, and KIR3DL1-specific antibodies was used. To assess 
the stability of iKIR expression, PBMCs were stimulated as above, 
sorted into iKIR+ and iKIR– fractions, and allowed to rest for 72 hours. 
iKIR expression was evaluated by flow cytometry at the time of sort -
ing (0 h) and at 72 hours.
Genotyping . High-resolution HLA typing for the HLA-A, B, and 
C loci was carried out by the Antony Nolan Trust using next-gener-
ation sequencing. KIR genotyping of cohort 1 was performed by the 
qKAT multiplex qPCR method using a Roche LightCycler 480 (45) ; 
KIR genotyping of cohort 2 was performed by PCR-SSP following the 
method of Vilches et al. (46); and KIR genotyping of cohort 3 was per-
formed by high-throughput sequencing (47)  and the results interpret -
ed using the bioinformatics pipeline PING (48) .
Mathematical modeling
Fitting the stable isotope–labeling data. There are 3 parts in the mod-
el to estimate the proliferation and disappearance rate of the T cell 
subsets. First, we quantified the availability of label in body water by 
measuring the fraction of heavy water in the saliva. We describe this 
availability with an empirical function S(t) with 3 parts (Equation 1) 
to reflect the 3-part protocol (full dose for 7 days, 2/3 dose for 42 
days, delabel) (Supplemental Figure 3 ). Individuals were assumed to 
have different values of f  (the maximal fraction of heavy water in the The Journal of Clinical Investigation    CLINICAL MEDICINE12
 J Clin Invest. 2023;133(12):e169496  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI169496We defined cell age as the time (in days) since the cell or its ancestor 
entered the memory compartment, not the time since the last division. 
If we define w (a, t) as the concentration of CD8+ T cells of age a  at time 
t, then:
     (Equation 5)
The equation for w(a, t), derived from the von Foerster equation (52), 
is as follows:
     (Equation 6)
In Equation 6, the initial condition is w (a, 0) = f (a), where f (a) is the ini-
tial age distribution, and the boundary condition is w (0,t) = λ .
We solve the steady-state age distribution by letting z  = ¯z, where 
bars denote the steady-state value. As ¯z  is a constant, the age equa -
tion is of the same form as if there were no proliferation, and a con-
stant death rate equal to D  = μ  – s (1 – 
 ). Therefore, the age distribu-
tion at equilibrium is exponential with rate parameter D , and the 
mean age is 
 .
We can show (Supplemental Results 5) that 
  > 0 for all positive 
values of model parameters. Therefore, CD8+ T cell age increases as 
the CD8+ T cell lifetime increases, all other parameters being equal. 
However, the rate parameter D  is the difference of 2 similar terms, 
both of which might be expected to vary with the functional iKIR 
count, and thus, while the intuition that cell age would increase with 
the functional iKIR count due to an increase in cell survival is cor-
rect, the correlation is expected to be weak.
Statistics
All statistical analysis was carried out in R, version 4.1.2. All report -
ed P values are 2 tailed. A P  value of less than 0.05 was considered 
significant, and where this threshold was decreased because of 
testing of multiple hypotheses, it is noted in the text. Multivariate 
linear regression, ANOVA, Davidson-MacKinnon J tests, and paired 
Mann-Whitney U tests (Wilcoxon) were conducted with the func-
tions lm, anova, lmtest::jtest, and stats::wilcox.test, respectively 
(base package unless stated otherwise).
Study approval
All study procedures were conducted according to the principles of 
the Declaration of Helsinki. All participants gave written informed 
consent following protocols approved by the National Research Ethics 
Service (NRES) (London 13/LO/1621 and 13/LO/0022, South Central 
Oxford 15/SC/0089 /2).
Author contributions
LB analyzed the data and contributed to the study design. LH 
recruited the participants and conducted experiments. AS, YZ, 
and DPG conducted experiments. LS, LMB, and AWCY ana -
lyzed the data. NNG, DK, and CR conducted the experiments. 
JAT supervised the experiments. GPT recruited the participants 
and provided patient data. DF recruited the participants. PJN 
and SGEM supervised the experimental work. RB supervised site of division to the blood (where it is observed). The parameters 
p, d*, and ΔL are drawn, for each T cell subset, from a lognormal 
prior distribution whose parameters are fitted (i.e., a hierarchical 
model). The lognormal distribution has 2 parameters: μ  and σ . The 
prior for σp, σd*, and σΔL is uniform between 0 and 1. The priors for 
μp, μd*, and μΔL are uniform between – ∞  and log(0.05), log(1), and 
log(21), respectively. Using a hierarchical model improved conver-
gence compared with allowing parameters to vary freely. Note that 
the hyperparameter μp is the same for all lymphocyte populations, 
regardless of infection status, functional iKIR count, cell subpop -
ulation (CD8+ Tcm or Temra), and iKIR expression status (func-
tional, nonfunctional, iKIR–); i.e, at no point did we impose any 
assumptions on how p  varied between the cell populations. Equa -
tion 3 was solved analytically to speed up the fitting process. All 
model fitting was conducted within a Bayesian framework, using 
the NUTS sampler implemented in Stan (via the R package rstan) 
(50) . The saliva, monocyte, and lymphocyte data were fitted simul-
taneously across all individuals and lymphocyte subsets. Simulta -
neous fitting of saliva, monocyte, and lymphocyte data means that 
errors are propagated correctly (fitting in a stepwise manner, as is 
common [ref. 21] , with point estimates from the first step being 
used in the second step and so on will lead to an underestimate 
of errors on the final parameters). To summarize, the parameters 
f, Δ, bw, r2, p, d*, and ΔL were fitted; f , bw, and r2 were allowed to 
be different for each individual; p , d*, and ΔL were allowed to be 
different for each individual and each cell population; Δ  was con-
strained to be the same for all individuals; and the total number 
of data points was 1,085 (not including replicates, typically 3 per 
data point). Best fits of the model to the saliva and monocyte data 
are shown in Supplemental Figures 3 and 5, respectively. Best fits 
of the model to the T cell data are shown in Figure 3 and Figure 
4. Parameter estimates are provided in Supplemental Tables 3 and 
4. The model fitting code is available at https:/ / github.com/ ada-
w-yan/kirdynamics (commit ID: e99899b). Repeating the fits in 
a frequentist framework using the global optimizer pseudo from 
the package FME (51)  in R, version 4.1.2, gave virtually identical 
results. The cell lifespan we report is the average for each subpop -
ulation: it is defined as 1/p  and is the average time between the cre -
ation of a cell (by proliferation) and the loss of the cell (by prolifer-
ation, death, differentiation); it differs from half-life by a factor of 
ln(2), i.e., half-life =  ln(2).lifespan=ln(2)/p.
Model prediction of the relationship between cell survival and cell age. 
We calculated how a change in the lifetime of a memory CD8+ T cell 
would impact CD8+ T cell age. We modeled the turnover of CD8+ T 
cells as follows:
     (Equation 4)
In Equation 4, z is the concentration of CD8+ T cells, λ is the rate at 
which cells enter the memory T cell compartment, s is the rate of divi-
sion, k is the carrying capacity of CD8+ T cells, and μ is the death rate.
The lifetime of CD8+ T cells in this model, as measured by sta -
ble isotope labeling, is 
 . Lifetime is defined as the time from cell 
production, either by division or by entry to the memory compart -
ment, to its death.The Journal of Clinical Investigation    CLINICAL MEDICINE13
 J Clin Invest. 2023;133(12):e169496  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI169496by the Jefferiss Trust. BA is a Wellcome Trust (WT) Investigator 
(103865Z/14/Z) and is also funded by the Medical Research Coun-
cil (MRC) (J007439, G1001052), the European Union Seventh 
Framework Programme (FP7 /2007–2013) under grant agreement 
317040 (QuanTI), the European Union H2020 programme under 
grant agreement 764698 (QuanTII), and Leukemia and Lympho -
ma Society (grant 15012). We thank Peter Parham of Stanford 
University for support during the project, Jyothi Jayaraman of the 
University of Cambridge for technical assistance, Jana Haddow, 
a Specialist Nurse Practitioner at the National Centre for Human 
Retrovirology (NCHR), for help with recruiting the patients with 
HTLV-1, and Parisa Amjadi, the FACS facility manager at Imperial 
College London, where all CL3 cell sorting was performed.
Address correspondence to: Becca Asquith, Department of Infectious 
Disease, Imperial College London, London, W2 1PG, United King -
dom. Phone: 44.207 .594.3731; Email: b.asquith@imperial.ac.uk.the experimental work and analysis and contributed to the study 
design and conception. DCM supervised the experimental work, 
contributed to the study design, and wrote the manuscript. BA 
analyzed the data, supervised the data analysis, conceptualized 
and designed the study, acquired funding, and wrote the manu-
script. The authorship order of the co–first authors is based on the 
relative contributions of their input to the final manuscript.
Acknowledgments
AWCY is funded by an Imperial College Research Fellowship. 
JT is funded by the European Research Council under the Euro -
pean Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation program 
(grant agreement 695551). LMB is funded by the European Union 
H2020 programme under grant agreement 764698 (QuanTII). 
GPT is funded by the NIHR Imperial Biomedical Research Cen-
tre. PJN is funded by the National Institute of Allergy and Infec-
tious Diseases NIH (U01 AI090905). DCM is partially funded 
  1. Lanier LL. Nk cell receptors. Annu Rev Immunol. 
1998;16(1):359–393.
 2. Bjorkstrom NK, et al. CD8 T cells express 
randomly selected KIRs with distinct spec-
ificities compared with NK cells. Blood. 
2012;120(17):3455–3465.
 3. Zohar O, et al. Cutting edge: MHC class I-Ly49 
interaction regulates neuronal function. J Immu-
nol. 2008;180(10):6447–6451.
 4. Robinson J, et al. IPD—the immuno polymorphism 
database.  Nucleic Acids Res. 2013;41:1234–1240.
 5. Winter CC, Long EO. A single amino acid in 
the p58 killer cell inhibitory receptor controls 
the ability of natural killer cells to discriminate 
between the two groups of HLA-C allotypes.  
J Immunol. 1997;158(9):4026–4028.
 6. Moretta A, et al. Receptors for HLA class-I mol-
ecules in human natural killer cells. Annu Rev 
Immunol. 1996;14:619–648.
 7 . Parham P, Moffett A. Variable NK cell receptors 
and their MHC class I ligands in immunity, repro -
duction and human evolution. Nat Rev Immunol. 
2013;13(2):133–144.
 8. Boelen L, et al. Inhibitory killer cell immuno -
globulin-like receptors strengthen CD8+ T cell- 
mediated control of HIV-1, HCV, and HTLV-1. Sci 
Immunol. 2018;3(29):eaao2892.
 9. Ugolini S, et al. Involvement of inhibitory NKRs 
in the survival of a subset of memory-phenotype 
CD8+ T cells. Nat Immunol. 2001;2(5):430–435.
 10. Diniz MO, et al. NK cells limit therapeutic 
vaccine-induced CD8+T cell immunity in a 
PD-L1-dependent manner. Sci Transl Med . 
2022;14(640):eabi4670.
 11. Peppa D, et al. Up-regulation of a death 
receptor renders antiviral T cells suscepti-
ble to NK cell-mediated deletion. J Exp Med . 
2013;210(1):99–114.
 12. Waggoner SN, et al. Natural killer cells act as 
rheostats modulating antiviral T cells. Nature. 
2011;481(7381):394–398.
 13. Young NT, et al. Differential expression of leuko -
cyte receptor complex-encoded Ig-like receptors 
correlates with the transition from effector to 
memory CTL. J Immunol. 2001;166(6):3933–3941.
 14. Piccioli D, et al. Contact-dependent stimulation and inhibition of dendritic cells by natural killer 
cells.  J Exp Med . 2002;195(3):335–341.
 15. Pieren DKJ, et al. Regulatory KIR+ RA+ T cells 
accumulate with age and are highly activated 
during viral respiratory disease. Aging Cell . 
2021;20(6):e13372.
 16. Li J, et al. KIR+CD8+ T cells suppress pathogenic T 
cells and are active in autoimmune diseases and 
COVID-19. Science . 2022;376(6590):eabi9591.
 17 . Macallan DC, et al. Current estimates of T 
cell kinetics in humans. Curr Opin Syst Biol. 
2019;18:77–86.
 18. Costa Del Amo P, et al. Human TSCM cell 
dynamics in vivo are compatible with long-lived 
immunological memory and stemness. PLOS 
Biol . 2018;16(6):e2005523.
 19. Patel AA, et al. The fate and lifespan of human 
monocyte subsets in steady state and systemic 
inflammation. J Exp Med . 2017;214(7):1913–1923.
 20. Akondy RS, et al. Origin and differentiation of 
human memory CD8 T cells after vaccination. 
Nature. 2017;552(7685):362–367 .
 21. Vrisekoop N, et al. Sparse production but prefer-
ential incorporation of recently produced naive T 
cells in the human peripheral pool. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A. 2008;105(16):6115–6120.
 22. Hellerstein MK. Measurement of T-cell kinetics: 
recent methodologic advances. Immunol T oday. 
1999;20(10):438–441.
 23. Busch R, et al. Measurement of cell prolif -
eration by heavy water labeling. Nat Protoc. 
2007;2(12):3045–3057 .
 24. Alter G, et al. Ligand-independent exhaustion 
of killer immunoglobulin-like receptor-positive 
CD8+ T cells in human immunodeficiency virus 
type 1 infection. J Virol. 2008;82(19):9668–9677 .
 25. Laydon DJ, et al. The relative contribu-
tions of infectious and mitotic spread to 
HTLV-1 persistence. PLoS Comput Biol. 
2020;16(9):e1007470.
 26. Wong-Baeza I, et al. KIR3DL2 binds to HLA-B27 
dimers and free H chains more strongly than 
other HLA class I and promotes the expansion 
of T cells in ankylosing spondylitis. J Immunol. 
2013;190(7):3216–3224.
 27 . Shaw J, Kollnberger S. New perspectives on the ligands and function of the killer cell immuno -
globulin-like receptor KIR3DL2 in health and 
disease. Front Immunol. 2012;3:339.
 28. Chan AT, et al. Expansion and enhanced survival 
of natural killer cells expressing the killer immuno -
globulin-like receptor KIR3DL2 in spondylarthritis.  
Arthritis Rheum. 2005;52(11):3586–3595.
 29. Huard B, Karlsson L. KIR expression on self-reac-
tive CD8+ T cells is controlled by T-cell receptor 
engagement. Nature. 2000;403(6767):325–328.
 30. Abo T, Balch CM. A differentiation antigen 
of human NK and K cells identified by a 
monoclonal antibody (HNK-1). J Immunol. 
1981;127(3):1024–1029.
 31. Ahmed R, et al. CD57+ memory T cells proliferate 
in vivo. Cell Rep. 2020;33(11):108501.
 32. Roederer M, et al. The genetic architecture of 
the human immune system: a bioresource for 
autoimmunity and disease pathogenesis. Cell . 
2015;161(2):387–403.
 33. Gossel G, et al. Memory CD4 T cell subsets 
are kinetically heterogeneous and replen-
ished from naive T cells at high levels. Elife . 
2017;6:e23013.
 34. Baliu-Piqué M, et al. Short lifespans of memory 
T-cells in bone marrow, blood, and lymph nodes 
suggest that T-cell memory is maintained by con-
tinuous self-renewal of recirculating cells. Front 
Immunol. 2018;9:2054:2054.
 35. Hanna GJ, et al. Neoadjuvant and adjuvant 
nivolumab and lirilumab in patients with recurrent, 
resectable squamous cell carcinoma of the head 
and neck. Clin Cancer Res . 2022;28(3):468–478.
 36. Ruggeri L, et al. Effectiveness of donor 
natural killer cell alloreactivity in mis-
matched hematopoietic transplants. Science . 
2002;295(5562):2097–2100.
 37 . Yabe T, et al. Donor killer immunoglobulin-like 
receptor (KIR) genotype-patient cognate KIR 
ligand combination and antithymocyte globulin 
preadministration are critical factors in outcome 
of HLA-C-KIR ligand-mismatched T cell-replete 
unrelated bone marrow transplantation. Biol 
Blood Marrow Transplant. 2008;14(1):75–87 .
 38. Cooley S, et al. Donors with group B KIR haplotypes 
improve relapse-free survival after unrelated hema -The Journal of Clinical Investigation    CLINICAL MEDICINE14
 J Clin Invest. 2023;133(12):e169496  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI169496topoietic cell transplantation for acute myeloge -
nous leukemia. Blood. 2009;113(3):726–732.
 39. Mahnke YD, et al. The who’s who of T-cell differ-
entiation: human memory T-cell subsets. Eur J 
Immunol. 2013;43(11):2797–2809.
 40. Ahmed R, et al. Human stem cell-like memory T 
cells are maintained in a state of dynamic flux. 
Cell Rep. 2016;17(11):2811–2818.
 41. Westera L, et al. Quantitating lymphocyte 
homeostasis in vivo in humans using stable iso -
tope tracers. Methods Mol Biol. 2013;979:107–131.
 42. Robinson J, et al. IPD-IMGT /HLA database. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 2020;48:D948–D55.
 43. Bowness P, et al. Th17 cells expressing KIR3DL2+ 
and responsive to HLA-B27 homodimers are 
increased in ankylosing spondylitis. J Immunol. 2011;186(4):2672–2680.
 44. Pugh J, et al. Abundant CpG-sequences in human 
genomes inhibit KIR3DL2-expressing NK cells. 
PeerJ . 2021;9:e12258.
 45. Jiang W, et al. qKAT: a high-throughput qPCR 
method for KIR gene copy number and haplotype 
determination. Genome Med . 2016;8(1):99.
 46. Vilches C, et al. Facilitation of KIR genotyping 
by a PCR-SSP method that amplifies short DNA 
fragments. Tissue Antigens . 2007;70(5):415–422.
 47 . Norman PJ, et al. Defining KIR and HLA 
class I genotypes at highest resolution via 
high-throughput sequencing. Am J Hum Genet. 
2016;99(2):375–391.
 48. Marin WM, et al. High-throughput interpretation 
of killer-cell immunoglobulin-like receptor short-read sequencing data with PING. PLoS Comput 
Biol . 2021;17(8):e1008904.
 49. Lahoz-Beneytez J, et al. Human neutrophil 
kinetics: modeling of stable isotope labeling data 
supports short blood neutrophil half-lives. Blood. 
2016;127(26):3431–3438.
 50.  RStan: the R interface to Stan. Version 2.21.5. Stan 
Development Team; 2023. https:/ /cran.r-project.
org/web/packages/rstan/vignettes/rstan.html.
 51. FME: A Flexible Modelling Environment for Inverse 
Modelling, Sensitivity, Identifiability and Monte 
Carlo Analysis. Version 1.3.6.2. Soetaert K, Pet -
zoldt T; 2021. https:/ /cran.r-project.org/web/
packages/FME/.
 52. Murray JD, ed. Mathematical Biology. Springer; 
2002.