4 SCALE –CRITICAL CARE: COLLABORATIVE LEADERSHIP
FOR IMPROVING HEALTH
1Laura Hobbs,2Cornelius Sendagire,3Jane Nakibuuka,4Henry Muwonge,5Tom Bashford,
6Rowan Burnstein.1Consultant Anaesthetist, East and North Hertfordshire NHS Trust ;
2Consultant Anaesthetist, Uganda Heart Institute ;3Consultant Physician and Intensive Care,
Mulago National Referral Hospital, Uganda ;4Country Lead, Uganda UK Health Alliance ;
5Consultant Neuroanaesthetist, Cambridge University Hospital; Assistant Professor
Healthcare Systems, University of Cambridge ;6Consultant Anaesthetist and Intensivist,
Cambridge University Hospital; Deputy Dean Health Education East of England
10.1136/leader-2023-FMLM.4
Context The SCALE critical care project is a collaborative
health workforce capacity and educational development initia-
tive, between the Ministry of Health Uganda, and the NHS inthe UK. The clinical leads are consultants in Anaesthesia and
Intensive care from Cambridge, UK and Kampala, Uganda.
Issue/Challenge Uganda faces a many challenges with the
workforce in critical care, for both medical and nursing staff.There is significantly limited critical care training burdened
with difficulties in retention of staff. In 2020 there were 1.3
ICU beds per million population, however this has beenexpanded as a result of the COVID 19 pandemic. There is
now a need to ensure that skilled human resources are avail-
able to ensure functional critical care capacity and develop-ment of the speciality.
The SCALE critical care project is structured around 3 co-
dependent initiatives:
1. A distance learning programme including online learning and
medical grand rounds
2. Long term placements in the UK for medical and nursing
staff
3. Long and short term placements for UK volunteers, with a
focus on practical support and educational delivery
Assessment of issue and analysis of its causes
Key stakeholders include senior intensive care doctors
leading the development of critical care in Uganda and Cam-bridge, the Ugandan Ministry of Health, the Uganda UKHealth Alliance (UUKHA) and many other partners includingRCOA, Association of Anesthesiologists of Uganda, Health
Education England and Cambridge Global Health
Partnerships.
There have been reciprocal visits on both sides, including
the permanent secretary for he alth visiting Cambridge in
April 2022. During the UK teamâC
¼™s visit to Uganda we
were able to gain a broad understanding of critical care
delivery, meeting nurses, docto rs on the unit to senior hospi-
tal directors at a range of hospitals in both Kampala and
Mbarara.
Impact Anticipated long term benefits include increased critical
care staffing experience, capacity and job satisfaction. Improve-
ment in multidisciplinary working (training of doctors andnurses is occurring in parallel, involvement of physiotherapy
and biomedical engineering also proposed).
Ultimately, we hope that in the future this work will be
characterised by improved patient outcomes and reduced mor-tality as well as development of research capacity alongside
the clinical aspects of the project.Intervention There has been development of leadership and
management for both sides of the partnership at many levels.The junior members of the team are able to participate inhigh level discussions and gain an understanding of how sus-tainable and reciprocal partnerships are developed and evolve.The more senior leaders are able to learn from healthcare in
another culture, and mentorship of the future healthcare lead-
ers in critical care.
Involvement of stakeholders, such as patients, carers or
family members:
Patients are not currently directly involved in the project.
Key Messages Sustainable partnerships require investment from
senior leaders in order to develop and affect meaningfulchange.
Development of critical care capacity through clinical train-
ing, leadership and research will ensure that patients will ben-
efit not just from access to critical care, but from the wider
benefits to healthcare that result, in Uganda as well as in theUK through the development of clinical, leadership and teach-
ing skills volunteers will experience.
Lessons learnt Undertaking such an ambitious programme
requires a large time commitment from senior leaders on both
sides of the partnership at a time when healthcare resources
are stretched. Whilst much time is volunteered, the support ofthe hospitals and governments has been critical to the successand sustainability of the project.
Measurement of improvement Output measurement will include
increase in critical care workforce numbers in Uganda, with a
plan 6-10 MTI doctors to be hosted by Cambridge University
Hospitals.
We collect feedback from the grand rounds and seek to
improve content and delivery accordingly.
Publication of novel research from Uganda will be a longer
term measurement once the research strand of the partnership
is developed.
Strategy for improvement The first MTI doctor is due to arrive
in the UK late in 2022; there will be ongoing training âC
¼’
both clinical intensive care medicine, but also in other critical
areas such as leadership and management training. The doc-
tors who undergo the MTI training will return to Uganda to
be the future leaders and drivers of intensive care medicinetraining.
The SCALE Critical Care project is truly collaborative.
Training of doctors alone will not lead to meaningful or sus-tainable development âC
¼’training of the multidisciplinary
team including nurses and physiotherapists is a critical part ofthe project.
5 EMPOWERING ORAL HEALTH IN THE COMMUNITY:LEADERSHIP LESSONS LEARNT FROM REDEPLOYMENT
1Laura Johnston,2Natalie Archer,3Katy Martin.1NHS England Regional Clinical Leadership
Fellow, Midlands and Specialty Registrar in Paediatric Dentistry, Birmingham Community
Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust ;2Specialty Registrar in Restorative Dentistry, Royal ENT
and Eastman Dental Hospital ;3Specialist Oral Surgeon, Birmingham Community Healthcare
NHS Foundation Trust
10.1136/leader-2023-FMLM.5
Context Oral health knowledge is fundamental to ensure all
healthcare teams achieve holistic patient care within commun-
ity settings. During the COVID-19 pandemic, dentists were
redeployed to district nursing teams to support wider health-
care service demands, where patients exhibited poor oralhealth and deficits in staff oral health knowledge were
observed.
During restoration and recovery of services, three post-
graduate dental trainees launched a trust wide training needsAbstracts
A4 BMJ Leader 2023;7 (Suppl 1):A1 –A37 on December 21, 2024 by guest. Protected by copyright. http://bmjleader.bmj.com/ leader: first published as 10.1136/leader-2023-FMLM.4 on 29 May 2023. Downloaded from 