Citation: La Ferla, B.; Vercelli, B.
Red-Emitting Carbon Quantum Dots
for Biomedical Applications:
Synthesis and Puriﬁcation Issues of
the Hydrothermal Approach.
Nanomaterials 2023 ,13, 1635.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
nano13101635
Academic Editors: Jose L. Arias and
Zhan’ao Tan
Received: 6 April 2023
Revised: 7 May 2023
Accepted: 11 May 2023
Published: 13 May 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
nanomaterials 
Article
Red-Emitting Carbon Quantum Dots for Biomedical
Applications: Synthesis and Puriﬁcation Issues of the
Hydrothermal Approach
Barbara La Ferla1
and Barbara Vercelli2,*
1Dipartimento di Biotecnologie e di Bioscienze, Universit àdegli Studi di Milano-Bicocca, Piazza della Scienza,
2, 20126 Milano, Italy; barbara.laferla@unimib.it
2Istituto di Chimica della Materia Condensata e di Tecnologie per l’Energia, CNR-ICMATE, Via Cozzi, 53,
20125 Milano, Italy
*Correspondence: barbara.vercelli@cnr.it
Abstract: The possibility of performing the synthesis of red-emitting carbon quantum dots (r-CDs), in
a well-controllable, large scale and environmentally sustainable way is undoubtedly of fundamental
importance, as it will pave the way to their employment in advanced medical large-scale applications.
Knowledge of the difﬁculties involved in producing r-CDs with reproducible optical, structural, and
chemical characteristics, might help in their large-scale production, making the process standardizable.
In this work, we present an experimental study, also supported by results reported in the literature,
on the issues encountered during the synthesis and post-synthesis puriﬁcation treatments of r-CDS.
We focused on the hydrothermal approach as it was found to be more suitable for future large-
scale industrial applications. We propose three synthetic strategies and observed that employing
p-phenylenediamine (p-PDA), as a precursor, the synthetic process showed low efﬁciency with low
yields of r-CDs, large amounts of unreacted precursor, and reaction intermediates. Changing reaction
parameters does not improve performance. The r-CDs obtained using citric acid (CA) and urea,
as precursors, resulted to be sensitive to pH and difﬁcult to separate from the reaction mixture.
Furthermore, the proposed synthetic strategies show that the hydrothermal preparation of r-CDS
requires approaches that are not fully sustainable.
Keywords: red-emitting carbon quantum dots; hydrothermal approaches; sustainable strategies
1. Introduction
Carbon quantum dots (CDs) are known as zero-dimensional carbonaceous nanomate-
rials with incomparable optical properties [ 1,2]. Since their accidental discovery in 2004,
they have become a central topic of the scientiﬁc community because of their peculiar
properties, which make them suitable materials for application in numerous ﬁelds, includ-
ingin vitro and in vivo bioimaging [ 3–5], the development of antibacterial and antiviral
agents [ 6,7], sensing [ 8], and optoelectronic devices [ 9,10]. In many cases, CDs are con-
sidered as graphitic carbon cores embedded in amorphous shells with different surface
functionalities, such as carboxyl, amide, hydroxyl, and carbonyl moieties, which allow their
derivatization with various entities (i.e., enzymes, etc.) [ 11]. CDs exhibit an excellent intrin-
sic ﬂuorescence, which can be tuned from the visible to NIR, and are also characterized
by extremely low toxicity and excellent biocompatibility crucial for real-world biological
applications.
Red-emitting CDs (r-CDs) result particularly suitable for biomedical applications
because red light shows low absorption, deep tissue penetration, and weak background
biological ﬂuorescence [ 12–14]. The preparation of CDs in the far-red to NIR region
has been considered the basic and fundamental requirement for practical application in
the biological and medical ﬁelds [ 15,16]. Therefore, the development of efﬁcient and
Nanomaterials 2023 ,13, 1635. https://doi.org/10.3390/nano13101635 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/nanomaterialsNanomaterials 2023 ,13, 1635 2 of 10
reproducible synthetic routes for r-CDs production can advance their applications in
many scientiﬁc and industrial areas. The literature is full of research papers dealing with
synthetic approaches of r-CDs for their use in the biomedical ﬁeld. The most recent ones
are the studies of Luo et al. [ 17] and Li et al. [ 18] reporting, respectively, the hydrothermal
synthesis of r-CDs for application in the detection of hematin in red cells and in the imaging
of lysosomes. On the other hand, Jia et al. [ 19] report the synthesis of water-soluble r-CDs
employed in the one proton and two protons imaging of various samples both in vitro and
in vivo . Particularly interesting are the works of Dong et al. [ 20] and Oluwafemi et al. [ 21]
which report cost-effective green and sustainable approaches for the preparation of r-CDs.
Lin et al. [ 12], in their recent review work on the tuning of the optical properties of r-CDs
and their applications, observed that the development of simple methods to manufacture
r-CDs with uniform size, structure, composition, and surface state could be an efﬁcient
way to solve the problems related to the low ﬂuorescence intensity, especially shown in
the long wavelength range. It seems that the synthetic strategies reported for far-red
to NIR CDs lack a rational design, and most of those reported are semi-empirical. The
synthesis of r-CDs seems to be a sort of black box, and it is still difﬁcult to obtain CDs with
speciﬁc optical properties by rationally choosing the precursors and reaction conditions,
and very few reproducible synthetic strategies have been published. Two recent review
papers [ 12,22] on synthetic strategies for r-CDs, try to provide some sort of rationalization
by focusing on key factors such as solvent, precursors, and puriﬁcation methods. In
particular, Bagheri et al. [ 22] highlight the application of statistical and computational
methods for the optimization of key parameters and the prediction of optical features.
Starting from these considerations, in the present work we report an experimental
study, also supported by literature data, which describes the problems encountered dur-
ing the hydrothermal synthesis and post-synthesis puriﬁcation treatments of r-CDs. We
chose the hydrothermal method because its results more suitable for future large-scale
industrial applications. We propose three synthetic strategies depicted in Scheme 1 and
we observe how the reaction parameters (solvent, co-precursor, and temperature) can
inﬂuence the reaction efﬁciency and the optical characteristics of the obtained CDs. We
also provide information about the applicability of the puriﬁcation methods in terms of
reaction efﬁciency and sample damage. Finally, we discuss the issues of obtaining r-CDs
with sustainable approaches.
Nanomaterials 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 10 
 
 biological and medical ﬁelds [15,16]. Therefore, the development of e ﬃcient and repro-
ducible synthetic routes for r- CDs production can advance their applications in many sci-
entiﬁc and industrial areas. The literature is full of research papers dealing with synthetic 
approaches of r-CDs for their use in the biomedical ﬁeld. The most recent ones are the 
studies of Luo et al. [17] and Li et al. [18]  reporting, respectively, the hydrothermal syn-
thesis of r-CDs for application in the detectio n of hematin in red cells and in the imaging 
of lysosomes. On the other hand, Jia et al. [1 9] report the synthesis of water-soluble r-CDs 
employed in the one proton and two protons imaging of various samples both in vitro 
and in vivo. Particularly interesting are the works of Dong et al. [20] and Oluwafemi et al. 
[21] which report cost-e ﬀective green and sustainable approaches for the preparation of r-
CDs. Lin et al. [12], in their recent review wo rk on the tuning of the optical properties of 
r-CDs and their applications, observed that the development of simple methods to man-
ufacture r-CDs with uniform size, structure, composition, and surface state could be an 
eﬃcient way to solve the problems related to the low ﬂuorescence intensity, especially 
shown in the long wavelength range. It seem s that the synthetic strategies reported for 
far-red to NIR CDs lack a rational design, and most of those reported are semi-empirical. The synthesis of r-CDs seems to be a sort of black box, and it is still di ﬃcult to obtain CDs 
with speci ﬁc optical properties by ra tionally choosing the precursors and reaction condi-
tions, and very few reproducible synthetic stra tegies have been published. Two recent re-
view papers [12,22] on synthetic strategies for r-CDs, try to provide some sort of rational-
ization by focusing on key factors such as solvent, precursors, and puri ﬁcation methods. 
In particular, Bagheri et al. [22] highlight the application of statistical and computational 
methods for the optimization of key parameters  and the prediction of optical features. 
Starting from these considerations, in the present work we report an experimental 
study, also supported by literature data, wh ich describes the problems encountered dur-
ing the hydrothermal synthesis and post-synthesis puri ﬁcation treatments of r-CDs. We 
chose the hydrothermal method because its results more suitable for future large-scale 
industrial applications. We propose three synthetic strategies depicted in Scheme 1 and 
we observe how the reaction parameters (solvent, co-precursor, and temperature) can in-ﬂuence the reaction e ﬃciency and the optical characteristics of the obtained CDs. We also 
provide information about the applicability of the puri ﬁcation methods in terms of reac-
tion eﬃciency and sample damage. Finally, we discuss the issues of obtaining r-CDs with 
sustainable approaches. 
 
Scheme 1. Entry A: hydrothermal synthesis using p-PDA with di ﬀerent solvents a ﬀording red CDs 
(A); entry B and B’ using p-PDA and citric acid ( B) or urea ( B’) as co-reagent in H 2O, aﬀording CDs 
Scheme 1. Entry ( A): hydrothermal synthesis using p-PDA with different solvents affording red CDs
(A); entry ( B) and ( B0) using p-PDA and citric acid ( B) or urea ( B0) as co-reagent in H 2O, affording
CDs mixture not containing ( B) or containing ( B0) the red component; entry ( C) using urea and citric
acid in different solvents affording mixtures containing the red component ( C).Nanomaterials 2023 ,13, 1635 3 of 10
2. Materials and Methods
All used chemicals and solvents were reagent grade and used as received. pH buffers
(3, 4, 7, 9, 12) for UV-vis analyses were purchased from Carlo Erba (Milan, Italy). Thin-
layer-chromatography (TLC) was performed on silica gel 60F 254plates (Merck, Darmstadt,
Germany) and visualized with UV detection (254 nm and 365 nm).
r-CDs Synthesis
p-phenylenediamine —r-CDs were prepared according to a previously reported synthesis
route [ 23]. A total of 0.25 g (2.3 mmol) of p-phenylene diamine were dissolved in 25 mL
of selected solvent (EtOH or MeOH or deionized water), transferred into a Teﬂon-lined
stainless-steel reactor (100 mL) and heated at 180C for 24 h. The reactor was then allowed
to cool down to room temperature, and the solution was ﬁltrated through a microporous
membrane (0.22 m) to remove the large particles. The obtained ﬁltrate was concentrated
and puriﬁed by silica gel column chromatography using a dichloromethane/EtOH (9.5:0.5)
mixture as eluent.
p-phenylenediamine and CA —CDs were prepared according to the reported synthesis
route [ 24]. A total of 1.8 g (17 mmol) of p-phenylenediamine and 3.2 g (17 mmol) of citric
acid (CA) were dissolved in 50 mL of deionized water and stirred for 15 min; then the
solution was transferred into a Teﬂon-lined stainless-steel reactor (100 mL) and heated
at 210C for 10h. The reactor was allowed to cool down to room temperature, and the
solution was ﬁltrated through a microporous membrane (0.22 m).
p-phenylenediamine and urea —CDs were prepared according to the reported synthesis
route [ 25]. A total of 0.2 g (1.85 mmol) of p-phenylenediamine and 0.2 g (3.3 mmol) of
urea were dissolved in 50 mL of deionized water and stirred for 15 min; then the solution
was transferred into a Teﬂon-lined stainless-steel reactor (100 mL) and heated at 160C
or 210C for 10 h. The reactor was allowed to cool down to room temperature, and the
solution was ﬁltrated through a microporous membrane (0.22 m).
CA and urea —CDs were prepared according to the reported synthetic route [ 26]. 1.3 g
(7 mmol) of CA and 1.3 g (21 mmol) of urea were dissolved in 20 mL of solvent (formamide
or EtOH or deionized water) and stirred for 15 min; then the solution was transferred into a
Teﬂon-lined stainless-steel reactor (100 mL) and heated at 180C for 12 h. The reactor was
then allowed to cool down to room temperature, and the solution was ﬁltrated through
a microporous membrane (0.22 m). The CDs mixtures obtained with EtOH and water
were precipitated with CH 3CN and EtOH, respectively, followed by centrifugation. The
re-dispersion/precipitation procedure was repeated three times to ensure the effective
removal of precursor residues and small derivatives. The CDs mixture obtained with
formamide as solvent was puriﬁed following a literature-recommended procedure [ 4]
employing an ion-exchange column (dowex 1 8 chloride form). A plastic column was
ﬁlled with 8 mL of dowex 1 8 chloride form (100–200 mesh), equilibrated with 0.5 m
hydrochloric acid, and copiously washed with deionized water to a neutral ph. then 200 L
of the CDs mixture was carefully loaded on the column. CDs fractions were respectively
separated employing deionized water, and HCl solution 1 M, 5 M and 10 M.
Characterization Techniques
UV-vis spectra were collected with a Perkin Elmer Lambda 35 spectrometer; FTIR
spectra were measured by infrared microscope Varian 610-IR coupled to the Varian 670-IR
FTIR spectrometer (Varian, Australia Pty Ltd., Melbourne, Australia), equipped with a
mercury cadmium telluride nitrogen cooled detector.
The continuous wave PL spectra were recorded at 25C using a Cary Eclipse Fluores-
cence Spectrometer (Agilent, Santa Clara, USA).
1HNMR spectra were recorded using a Bruker 400 MHz at 25C. Chemical Shifts
() are reported in ppm downﬁeld from the residual solvent peak. NMR data process-
ing was performed with MestReNova v14.2.0 software (Mestrelab Research, Santiago de
Compostela, Spain).Nanomaterials 2023 ,13, 1635 4 of 10
3. Results and Discussion
In the ﬁrst proposed synthetic strategy, we repeated a literature-reported hydrothermal
route [ 24] based on an ethanol solution of p-PDA heated at 180C in an autoclave for
24 h (Scheme 1A). Surprisingly and in contrast with reported data, the reaction mixture
contained along with the red-emitting component, other emitting ones (see TLC in Figure
S1 inset). After puriﬁcation through silica gel column chromatography (eluent DCM/EtOH
9.5:0.5), four fractions were separated, which were analyzed with spectroscopic techniques
(UV-vis, FT-IR and1H-NMR). According to TLC, the UV-vis spectra (Figure 1a) show that
the ﬁrst fraction eluted (fraction A) mainly consists of un-reacted p-PDA.
Nanomaterials 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 10 
 
 performed with MestReNova v14.2.0 software (Mestrelab Research, Santiago de Compo-
stela, Spain).  
3. Results and Discussion 
In the ﬁrst proposed synthetic strategy, we re peated a literature-reported hydrother-
mal route [24] based on an ethanol solution of p-PDA heated at 180 °C in an autoclave for 
24 h (Scheme 1A). Surprisingly and in contra st with reported data, the reaction mixture 
contained along with the red-emi tting component, other emi tting ones (see TLC in Figure 
S1 inset). After puri ﬁcation through silica gel column chromatography (eluent 
DCM/EtOH 9.5:0.5), four fractions were separated, which were analyzed with spectro-
scopic techniques (UV-vis, FT-IR and 1H-NMR). According to TLC, the UV-vis spectra 
(Figure 1a) show that the ﬁrst fraction eluted (fraction A) mainly consists of un-reacted p-
PDA. 
220 330 440 550 6603
2normalized absorbance
wavelength / nm(a)
1
500 600 700 800(b)counts 
wavelength / nm 
3500 3000 2500 2000 1500 1000(c)
* ****
* ***
*
**absorbance / a. u.
wavenumber / cm-1 
Figure 1. (a) UV-vis spectra in EtOH solution of p-PDA (black line), fraction A (blue line), fraction 
B (red line), fraction C (green lin e), fraction D (orange line); ( b) PL-emission in EtOH solution of 
faction B (red line), fraction C (gr een line), fraction D (orange line); ( c) FT-IR spectra of faction B (red 
line), fraction C (green line), fraction D (orange line).  
The main absorption bands of p-PDA at 244 nm, and at 310 nm are present, and can 
be, respectively, ascribed to the π–π* transition of the C=C bonds of the ring, and the n–
π* transition of the C=N bonds. A third band is  also present at 285 nm (1 in Figure 1a), 
ascribable to the π–π* transition of condensed rings [27 ] and may indicate the presence of 
graphitic structures [28, 29]; the presence of aromatic structures othe r than p-PDA is also 
conﬁrmed in the NMR spectra by the presence of proton signals between 6.5 and 8.5 ppm 
(Figure S1). The UV-vis spectra of all the remaining fractions (Figure 1a) do not present 
Figure 1. (a) UV-vis spectra in EtOH solution of p-PDA (black line), fraction A (blue line), fraction B
(red line), fraction C (green line), fraction D (orange line); ( b) PL-emission in EtOH solution of faction
B (red line), fraction C (green line), fraction D (orange line); ( c) FT-IR spectra of faction B (red line),
fraction C (green line), fraction D (orange line).
The main absorption bands of p-PDA at 244 nm, and at 310 nm are present, and
can be, respectively, ascribed to the –* transition of the C=C bonds of the ring, and the
n–* transition of the C=N bonds. A third band is also present at 285 nm (1 in Figure 1a),
ascribable to the –* transition of condensed rings [ 27] and may indicate the presence
of graphitic structures [ 28,29]; the presence of aromatic structures other than p-PDA is
also conﬁrmed in the NMR spectra by the presence of proton signals between 6.5 and
8.5 ppm (Figure S1). The UV-vis spectra of all the remaining fractions (Figure 1a) do
not present the p-PDA absorption bands. The spectrum of the second fraction (fraction
B) presents band 1, ascribable to the presence of the graphic cores [ 28,29], and a second
band at 507 nm (2 in Figure 1a), which, as will be treated below, is responsible for the red
emission of the sample. A shoulder at 256 nm 3 in Figure 1a) is also present, which may
be ascribed to the –* transition of fused rings, and may indicate the presence of both
short polynuclear aromatic systems, bonded to the graphitic cores and small graphiticNanomaterials 2023 ,13, 1635 5 of 10
structures in the growth stage (i.e., graphene sheets or graphene CDs [ 28,29]). In agreement
with literature data [ 23] fraction B corresponds to the r-CDs, and it results to be the less
abundant component of the reaction mixture: only 5% yield. The spectra of the third and
fourth fractions (fractions C and D) are similar. Compared to fraction B, in addition to
band 1, shoulder 3 turns into a band, band 2 shifts of ca 20 nm to lower wavelengths and a
new band at 415 nm appears. Photoluminescence emission (PL-emission) determinations
show that fractions B, C, and D excited at 510 nm (Figure 1b) present a band at ca 600 nm
(red-emission), whose intensity progressively decreases going from fraction B to fraction D.
The stokes shifts are 90 nm for fraction B, and 100 nm for fraction C and D. The estimated
PL QY (see Supplementary Materials for more information) of fraction B is ca 27%, in
agreement with literature reported data [ 23]. Furthermore, fraction B proved to be stable
both in solid and in EtOH solution for over 1 month. FT-IR determinations (Figure 1c)
show that at the edges of the basal planes of the graphitic cores of fractions B, C and D
are present short polynuclear aromatic systems and aromatic amines. In particular, the
short polynuclear aromatic systems bands (red-starred in Figure 1c) are the aromatic C-H
stretching at 3030 cm 1, the skeletal vibrations involving the C to C stretching within
the ring at 1512 cm 1and 1441 cm 1, the out-of-plane C-H bending at 830 cm 1[27];
the amine bands (blue-starred in Figure 1c) are the asymmetric N-H stretching at 3420
cm 1, the symmetric N-H stretching at 3329cm 1and 3204 cm 1and the N-H bending
at1633 cm 1[27]. The1H NMR spectra of fractions B, C, and D also conﬁrm the presence
of the signals between 6.7 and 8.5 ppm that can belong to polycyclic aromatic systems
containing conjugated pyrroles and pyridines (Figure S1). FT-IR spectra of all three fractions
also show the C-H stretching bands of aliphatic systems at 2910 cm 1and 2850 cm 1(black
starred in Figure 1c), which may be ascribable to a possible role played by the solvent EtOH
in the CDs formation, the presence of non-aromatic protons is also conﬁrmed by NMR
signals below 4 ppm. In particular, the co-presence of the FT-IR bands typical of esters,
such as the C=O stretching band at 1740 cm 1and the C-O stretching band at 1250 cm 1
(green starred in Figure 1c) [ 27], may suggest that the solvent causes the formation of esters
functional groups, bonded to the graphitic cores. The presence of ethyl esters is evident in
NMR spectra of fractions B and C testiﬁed by the quartet at 3.6 ppm (-OCH 2CH 3) and 1.2
ppm (-OCH 2CH 3).
Given the possible role played by the reaction medium in the formation of r-CDs, we
performed reaction route A (Scheme 1) using MeOH and water, respectively, and keeping
unchanged all other reaction parameters. The aim was to obtain the r-CDs as the only
component in large amounts and make the process more sustainable, using a greener
solvent. Unfortunately, the UV-vis spectra of the reaction mixtures (Figure S2) show that
the reaction performance seems to decrease going from EtOH to water. The absorption
bands 1 (starred in Figure S2 and ascribed to the presence of graphitic cores [ 27–29]) and 2
(responsible for the red emission) progressively decrease in intensity leaving only the typical
absorption bands of un-reacted p-PDA. Furthermore, TLC (Figure S1 inset) of all reaction
mixtures shows, that there are no considerable differences between the products obtained
from the syntheses with EtOH and MeOH, and the product obtained from the reaction
with water does not present the red-emitting component, but only the un-reacted p-PDA.
In the light of the above-observed difﬁculties in obtaining r-CDs using p-PDA in water
and trying to overcome them, we performed two more syntheses, where we employed
two bio-synthesizable and low-cost co-precursors, such as CA and urea, respectively
(Scheme 1B,B0), together with p-PDA and water. The UV-vis spectra of the reaction mixtures
obtained from both synthetic routes (Figure S3) show the typical –* and n- * transition
bands, at 240 nm and 300 nm, respectively, ascribed to un-reacted p-PDA, which cover
the possible bands of CDs. In particular, the spectrum of the reaction mixture obtained
using CA does not present absorption bands in the low energy absorption region and
the solution under a 365 nm UV lamp shows green emission (Figure S3 inset a), with no
red components. On the other hand, the reaction mixture obtained using urea presents a
further weak absorption band at ca 495 nm (Figure S3), which may indicate the presence ofNanomaterials 2023 ,13, 1635 6 of 10
a red component. However, its TLC (Figure S3 inset b) shows the presence of at least four
more fractions together with the red one and the un-reacted p-PDA. Increasing the reaction
temperature from 160C to 210C does not improve the reaction performance, in terms of
complete conversion of p-PDA, and/or reduction of the number of mixture components in
favor of the red one.
Therefore, we stopped employing p-PDA as the precursor, and we performed three
new syntheses (Scheme 1C) employing CA and urea, as precursors, with different reaction
solvents: water, EtOH, and formamide. The obtained reaction mixtures (Figure 2A,B)
clearly show the inﬂuence of the solvent on the preparation of CDs. Only the samples
obtained with formamide are red-colored (Figure 2A) and the red emission under UV-lamp
is difﬁcult to observe, because the samples showed to be a mixture of different emitting
components (Figure 2B).
Nanomaterials 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 10 
 
 cover the possible bands of CDs. In particular, the spectrum of the reaction mixture ob-
tained using CA does not present absorption bands in the low energy absorption region 
and the solution under a 365 nm UV lamp show s green emission (Figure S3 inset a), with 
no red components. On the other hand, the reac tion mixture obtained using urea presents 
a further weak absorption band at ca 495 nm (Figure S3), which may indicate the presence 
of a red component. However, its TLC (Figure S3 inset b) shows the presence of at least 
four more fractions together with the red on e and the un-reacted p-PDA. Increasing the 
reaction temperature from 160 °C to 210 °C does not improve the reaction performance, 
in terms of complete conversion of p-PDA, and/or reduction of the number of mixture 
components in favor of the red one. 
Therefore, we stopped employing p-PDA as the precursor, and we performed three 
new syntheses (Scheme 1C) employing CA and urea, as precursors, with di ﬀerent reaction 
solvents: water, EtOH, and formamide. The obta ined reaction mixtures (Figure 2 A and B) 
clearly show the in ﬂuence of the solvent on the preparation of CDs. Only the samples 
obtained with formamide are red-colored (Figure 2A) and the red emission under UV-
lamp is di ﬃcult to observe, because the samples showed to be a mixture of di ﬀerent emit-
ting components (Figure 2B). 
  
(A) ( B) 
Figure 2. (A) Photograph of the reaction mixtures  obtained from CA and urea in di ﬀerent solvents; 
(B) Photograph of the reaction mixtures  obtained from CA and urea in di ﬀerent solvents under 365 
nm UV lamp. From left to right: formamide, water, EtOH. 
On the other hand, the mixtures obtained from water and EtOH are pale yellow and 
golden yellow colored, respectively, showing blue and pale green emissions, under a UV 
lamp. The UV-vis spectrum (Figure 3a) of the formamide sample shows an absorption 
band at 263 nm, which may indicate the presence of graphitic cores [27–29], and a second absorption peak at 554 nm with a shoulder at 520 nm, responsible of the red-emission. 
  
Figure 2. (A) Photograph of the reaction mixtures obtained from CA and urea in different solvents;
(B) Photograph of the reaction mixtures obtained from CA and urea in different solvents under
365 nm UV lamp. From left to right: formamide, water, EtOH.
On the other hand, the mixtures obtained from water and EtOH are pale yellow and
golden yellow colored, respectively, showing blue and pale green emissions, under a UV
lamp. The UV-vis spectrum (Figure 3a) of the formamide sample shows an absorption
band at 263 nm, which may indicate the presence of graphitic cores [ 27–29], and a second
absorption peak at 554 nm with a shoulder at 520 nm, responsible of the red-emission.
PL-determinations show that the PL-emission bands peaked at ca 600 nm (red emis-
sion, Figure 3b), upon 520 nm and 560 nm excitation with Stokes shifts of ca 80 nm and
40 nm, respectively. The UV-vis spectra of the samples obtained from water and EtOH
(Figure 3a) are similar, showing an n– * transition band at 330 nm and 340 nm, respectively,
due to C=O and C=N bonds. They also proved to be easily puriﬁed through precipita-
tion/centrifugation cycles, giving solids that could be redispersed in water and EtOH,
respectively [ 30,31]. On the other hand, the separation of the red component from the
formamide mixture was revealed to be not so easy. We followed a literature-recommended
procedure [ 26], based on an ion-exchange column employing HCl at increasing concen-
trations, as eluent, and we discovered that the red component deteriorates during the
puriﬁcation process, because it showed to be sensitive to solution pH. In particular, as
Figure 3c shows, the intensity of the low energy absorption band decreases in the low pH
region, resulting in the loss of the red PL-emission. The observed phenomenon, in contrast
with what was observed for the CDs obtained from water [ 30], was found to be irreversible.
The resulting red component was stable in neutral and alkaline media (pH 7 and 9) and
deteriorates in acidic media (pH 4).
The above-reported results enable some considerations on the application of hydrother-
mal synthetic approaches in the production of red-emitting CDs. Starting from the ﬁrst
proposed strategy (Scheme 1A), we can state that the reaction reported in the literature [ 22]
did not go to completion with the conversion of p-PDA into r-CDs (fraction B). UV-vis
analyses (Figure 1a) show the co-presence of un-reacted p-PDA (fraction A) together with
two more species (fractions C and D), which may be considered two growth-stage interme-
diates of condensation/graphitization of p-PDA. It is noteworthy that the UV-vis band 3 at
256 nm, in fraction B is a shoulder, while in fractions C and D is a deﬁned peak. On the
other hand, band 2 splits into two peaks, and shifts to higher energies. We above-ascribed
band 3 to fused rings of short polynuclear aromatic systems [ 27], whose presence in allNanomaterials 2023 ,13, 1635 7 of 10
fractions is also conﬁrmed by FT-IR and1HNMR determinations. Thus, we may suppose
that these short polynuclear aromatic systems are the ﬁrst stage species of the condensa-
tion/cyclization processes of conversion of p-PDA into more complex graphitic structures.
The observed decrease of the intensity of band 3, becoming a shoulder in fraction B and
leaving only band 1 (ascribed to the presence of graphitic cores [ 27–29], Figure 1a), may
indicate the progressive growth of these short polynuclear aromatic systems and their
conversion into graphitic structures. Furthermore, the proposed synthetic approach shows
that fraction B, i.e., r-CDs, resulted in being the less abundant component (estimated yield
of 5%) indicating that the synthetic strategy is not efﬁcient, and not suitable for industrial
applications. We observed that neither increasing reaction temperature and time, respec-
tively, nor working under an inert atmosphere (Ar) improves the reaction performance.
Furthermore, we observed that the solvent is also involved in CDs formation. In the case of
EtOH, FT-IR and NMR determinations suggest that the solvent may be responsible for the
formation of ester groups bonded to the graphitic cores. Changing EtOH with MeOH and
water does not improve the reaction performance in favor of the red component; besides in
water, p-PDA seems to remain un-reacted.
Nanomaterials 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 10 
 
 200 400 600 800(a)normalized wavelength
wavelength / nm 400 500 600 700 800 absorbance / a. u.
wavelength / nm(b)
PL-emission
 
400 600 8000.000.050.10(c) pH 3
 pH 4
 pH 7
 pH 9absorbance / a. u.
wavelength / nm 
Figure 3. (a) UV-vis spectra of the reaction mixtures obta ined from CA + urea in water (blue line), 
EtOH (green line), and formamide (red line); ( b) UV-vis (black line) and PL-emission spectra (exc. 
520 nm orange line, exc. 560 nm red line) of the reac tion mixture obtained from CA + urea in forma-
mide; ( c) UV-vis spectra of the reaction mixture ob tained from CA + urea in formamide in di ﬀerent 
pH buﬀers. 
PL-determinations show that the PL-emission  bands peaked at ca 600 nm (red emis-
sion, Figure 3b), upon 520 nm and 560 nm excita tion with Stokes shifts of ca 80 nm and 40 
nm, respectively. The UV-vis spectra of the samples obtained from water and EtOH (Fig-
ure 3a) are similar, showing an n– π* transition band at 330 nm and 340 nm, respectively, 
due to C=O and C=N bonds. They also prov ed to be easily puri ﬁed through precipita-
tion/centrifugation cycles, giving solids that  could be redispersed in water and EtOH, re-
spectively [30,31]. On the other hand, the separation of the red component from the forma-
mide mixture was revealed to be not so easy . We followed a literature-recommended pro-
cedure [26], based on an ion-exchange column employing HCl at increasing concentra-
tions, as eluent, and we discovered that th e red component deteriorates during the puri-
ﬁcation process, because it showed to be sensit ive to solution pH. In particular, as Figure 
3c shows, the intensity of the low energy abso rption band decreases in the low pH region, 
resulting in the loss of the red PL-emission. The observed phenomenon, in contrast with 
what was observed for the CDs obtained from water [30], was found to be irreversible. 
The resulting red component was stable in neutral and alkaline media (pH 7 and 9) and 
deteriorates in acidic media (pH ≤ 4). 
The above-reported results enable some considerations on the application of hydro-
thermal synthetic approaches in the production of red-emi tting CDs. Starting from the 
ﬁrst proposed strategy (Scheme 1A), we can stat e that the reaction reported in the litera-
ture [22] did not go to completion with the conversion of p-PDA into r-CDs (fraction B). 
UV-vis analyses (Figure 1a) show the co-presence of un-reacted p-PDA (fraction A) 
Figure 3. (a) UV-vis spectra of the reaction mixtures obtained from CA + urea in water (blue line),
EtOH (green line), and formamide (red line); ( b) UV-vis (black line) and PL-emission spectra (exc.
520 nm orange line, exc. 560 nm red line) of the reaction mixture obtained from CA + urea in
formamide; ( c) UV-vis spectra of the reaction mixture obtained from CA + urea in formamide in
different pH buffers.
The second proposed strategy (Scheme 1B,B0) shows that the addition of co-precursors,
such as CA and urea, does not improve the p-PDA hydrothermal conversion into r-CDs. InNanomaterials 2023 ,13, 1635 8 of 10
particular, in both cases we observed the dominant presence of unreacted p-PDA, and, in
the case of CA, the obtained product shows green emission under UV lamp.
In the third proposed synthetic strategy (Scheme 1C), it is noteworthy the inﬂuence
of the solvent on the preparation of CDs. The red component is present only in the
synthetic route employing formamide, and it is absent in the ones employing water or EtOH.
Furthermore, the red component is revealed to be sensitive to solution pH and deteriorates
in acidic media. Thus, the separation with a literature-recommended procedure [ 26] based
on an ion exchange column employing HCl, caused its damage.
Finally, taking into account the three proposed hydrothermal synthetic routes it results
that the preparation of r-CDs is not an environmentally friendly, facile, and low cost-cost
process. In agreement with what was observed by Bagheri et al. [ 22], considering the ﬁrst
two proposed approaches, r-CDs are obtained by employing a toxic, high-cost precursor,
such as p-PDA. On the other hand, in the third approach, where p-PDA was replaced
by two bio-synthesizable and low-cost precursors (CA and urea), to obtain r-CDs the
use of formamide as solvent is necessary, which is not properly green and sustainable.
Furthermore, the post-synthesis puriﬁcation treatment was complex with small reaction
yields and/or damage of the red component. In the present case, the dialysis route was
not taken into account as a puriﬁcation strategy, because the products of all the studied
synthetic strategies resulted in mixtures of different emitting components (see also the TLC
reported in the supporting information). The employment of chromatographic techniques
was found to be more suitable for their separation/puriﬁcation.
4. Conclusions
In conclusion, in the present work, we reported the limitations and problems encoun-
tered in employing hydrothermal synthetic strategies for the sustainable hydrothermal
preparation of r-CDs. In general, we observed that using p-PDA, as starting material,
the reaction process showed low efﬁciency with low yields of r-CDs, a large amount of
un-reacted p-PDA, and reaction intermediates. Changing the reaction parameters (solvent,
temperature, co-precursors) does not improve the reaction performance. On the other hand,
the observed pH dependence of r-CDs complicates the post-treatment separation steps,
causing damage to the red component.
The results above-described, in agreement with what was reported by Bagheri et al. [ 22],
show that the preparation of r-CDs in a well-controllable, large scale and sustainable way
presents some problems, the knowledge of which could be useful to improve their synthetic
strategies, allowing the scale-up for industrial applications. For example, knowledge of
the low efﬁciency of the synthesis process can help both to improve the process itself and
to ﬁnd sustainable strategies to recycle and reuse the unreacted precursors and reaction
by.productus. Undoubtedly, the possibility to perform the synthesis of long-wavelength
CDs, controlled according to the purpose, is of paramount importance because it will pave
the way to their employment in a wide range of advanced medical applications. To this
end, further exploration is still ongoing.
Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https://
www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/nano13101635/s1, Quantum Yields (QYs) measurements, ( Figure S3 ).
Figure S1:1HNMR spectra; Figure S2: UV-vis Spectra; Figure S3 : UV-vis Spectra; References [32–34]
are cited in the supplementary materials.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, writing—original draft preparation B.V .; writing—review
and editing, B.V . and B.L.F. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Data Availability Statement: Data is contained within the article and Supplementary Materials.
Acknowledgments: We are indebted to the Italian Government for the ﬁnancial support. B.V .
acknowledges CNR for the Short Term Mobility Grant (2020). B.V . and B.L.F. acknowledge Martina
Rizzo for her enthusiastic work.Nanomaterials 2023 ,13, 1635 9 of 10
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Cao, L.; Meziani, M.J.; Sahu, S.; Ya-Ping Sun, Y.-P . Photoluminescence Properties of Graphene versus Other Carbon Nanomaterials.
Acc. Chem. Res. 2013 ,46, 171–180. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Song, S.Y.; Sui, L.Z.; Liu, K.K.; Cao, Q.; Zhao, W.B.; Liang, Y.C.; Lv, C.F.; Zang, J.H.; Shang, Y.; Lou, Q.; et al. Self-exothermic
reaction driven large-scale synthesis of phosphorescent carbon nanodots. Nano Res. 2021 ,14, 2231–2240. [CrossRef]
3. Lim, S.Y.; Shen, W.; Gao, Z. Carbon quantum dots and their applications. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2015 ,44, 362–381. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Jelinek, R. Bioimaging Applications of Carbon-Dots. In Carbon Quantum Dots ; Carbon Nanostructures; Springer: Cham,
Switzerland, 2017; pp. 61–69. [CrossRef]
5. Deng, Y.; Shen, C.; Zhao, W.; Zheng, G.; Jiao, F.; Lou, Q.; Liu, K.; Shan, C.-X.; Dong, L. Biosynthesis of the Narrowband Deep-Red
Emissive Carbon Nanodots from Eggshells. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 2023 ,11, 6535–6544. [CrossRef]
6. Bagheri, Z.; Ehtesabi, H.; Hallaji, Z.; Aminoroaya, N.; Tavana, H.; Behroodi, E.; Rahimifard, M.; Abdollahi, M.; Latiﬁ, H. On-chip
analysis of carbon dots effect on yeast replicative lifespan. Anal. Chim. Acta 2018 ,1033 , 119–127. [CrossRef]
7. Dong, X.; Moyer, M.M.; Yang, F.; Sun, Y.-P .; Yang, L. Carbon Dots’ Antiviral Functions Against Noroviruses. Sci. Rep. 2017 ,7, 519.
[CrossRef]
8. Jiang, K.; Sun, S.; Zhang, L.; Wang, Y.; Cai, C.; Lin, H. Bright-Yellow-Emissive N-Doped Carbon Dots: Preparation, Cellular
Imaging, and Bifunctional Sensing. ACS Appl. Mater. Int. 2015 ,7, 23231–23238. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9. Pei, Z.W.; Wei, H.Y.; Liu, Y.C. Exciton Up-Conversion by Well-Distributed Carbon Quantum Dots in Luminescent Materials for an
Efﬁcient Organic Light-Emitting Diode. Nanomaterials 2022 ,12, 1174. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10. Kwon, W.; Do, S.; Lee, J.; Hwang, S.; Kim, J.K.; Rhee, S.-W. Freestanding Luminescent Films of Nitrogen-Rich Carbon Nanodots
toward Large-Scale Phosphor-Based White-Light-Emitting Devices. Chem. Mater. 2013 ,25, 1893–1899. [CrossRef]
11. Li, L.; Dong, T. Photoluminescence tuning in carbon dots: Surface passivation or/and functionalization, heteroatom doping. J.
Mater. Chem. C 2018 ,6, 7944–7970. [CrossRef]
12. Zhu, Z.; Zhai, Y.; Li, Z.; Zhu, P .; Mao, S.; Zhu, C.; Du, D.; Belﬁore, L.A.; Tang, J.; Lin, Y. Red carbon dots: Optical property
regulations and applications. Mater. Today 2019 ,30, 52–79. [CrossRef]
13. Shi, X.; Meng, H.; Sun, Y.; Qu, L.; Lin, Y.; Li, Z.; Du, D. Far-Red to Near-Infrared Carbon Dots: Preparation and Applications in
Biotechnology. Small 2019 ,15, 1901507. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Hu, S.; Trinchi, A.; Atkin, P .; Cole, I. Tunable Photoluminescence Across the Entire Visible Spectrum from Carbon Dots Excited by
White Light. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2015 ,54, 2970–2974. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Lee, C.; Kwon, W.; Beack, S.; Lee, D.; Park, Y.; Kim, H.; Hahn, S.K.; Rhee, S.-W.; Kim, C. Biodegradable Nitrogen-Doped Carbon
Nanodots for Non-Invasive Photoacoustic Imaging and Photothermal Therapy. Theranostics 2016 ,6, 2196–2208. [CrossRef]
16. Gao, D.; Zhao, H.; Chen, X.; Fan, H. Recent advance in red-emissive carbon dots and their photoluminescent mechanisms. Mater.
Today Chem. 2018 ,9, 103–113. [CrossRef]
17. Ju, Y.Y.; Li, N.; Liu, S.G.; Liang, J.Y.; Gao, X.; Fan, Y.Z.; Luo, H.O.; Li, N.B. Proton-controlled synthesis of red-emitting carbon dots
and application for hematin detection in human erythrocytes. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2019 ,411, 1159–1167. [CrossRef]
18. Zuo, G.; Jiao, Y.; Gao, R.; Xie, A.; Pan, X.; Su, T.; Dong, W. Lipophilic Red-Emitting Oligomeric Organic Dots for Moisture
Detection and Cell Imaging. ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 2020 ,3, 1942–1949. [CrossRef]
19. Liu, Y.; Gou, H.; Huang, X.; Zhang, G.; Xi, K.; Jia, X. Rational synthesis of highly efﬁcient ultra-narrow red-emitting carbon
quantum dots for NIR-II two-photon bioimaging. Nanoscale 2020 ,12, 1589–1601. [CrossRef]
20. Liang, Y.C.; Liu, K.K.; Wu, X.Y.; Lou, Q.; Sui, L.Z.; Dong, L.; Yuan, K.J.; Shan, C.X. Lifetime-Engineered Carbon Nanodots for Time
Division Duplexing. Adv. Sci. 2021 ,8, 2003433. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21. Masha, S.; Oluwafemi, O.S. Cost-effective synthesis of red-emitting carbon-based quantum dots and its photothermal proﬁling.
Mat. Lett. 2022 ,323, 132590. [CrossRef]
22. Hallaji, Z.; Bagheri, Z.; Kalji, S.-O.; Ermis, E.; Ranjba, B. Recent advances in the rational synthesis of red-emissive carbon dots for
nanomedicine applications: A review. FlatChem 2021 ,29, 100271. [CrossRef]
23. Jiang, K.; Sun, S.; Zhang, L.; Lu, Y.; Wu, A.; Cai, C.; Lin, H. Red, Green, and Blue Luminescence by Carbon Dots: Full-Color
Emission Tuning and Multicolor Cellular Imaging. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2015 ,127, 5450–5453. [CrossRef]
24. Liu, Y.; Luo, S.; Wu, P .; Ma, C.; Wu, X.; Xu, M.; Li, W.; Liu, S. Hydrothermal synthesis of green ﬂuorescent nitrogen doped carbon
dots for the detection of nitrite and multicolor cellular imaging. Anal. Chim. Acta 2019 ,1090 , 133–142. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Ding, H.; Yu, S.-B.; Wei, J.-S.; Xiong, H.-M. Full-Color Light-Emitting Carbon Dots with a Surface-State-Controlled Luminescence
Mechanis. ACS Nano 2016 ,10, 484–491. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. Hola, K.; Maria Sudolska, M.; Kalytchuk, S.; Nachtigallova, L.; Rogach, D.L.; Otyepka, M.; Zboril, R. Graphitic Nitrogen Triggers
Red Fluorescence in Carbon Dots. ACS Nano 2017 ,11, 12402–12410. [CrossRef]
27. Silverstein, R.M.; Bassler, G.C. Spectrometric Identiﬁcation of Organic Compounds , 2nd ed.; John Wiley & Sons, Inc.: New York, NY,
USA, 1967; pp. 64–78.
28. Abdolkarimi-Mahabadi, M.; Bayat, A.; Mohammadi, A. Use of UV-Vis Spectrophotometry for Characterization of Carbon
Nanostructures: A Review. Theor. Exp. Chem. 2021 ,57, 191–198. [CrossRef]Nanomaterials 2023 ,13, 1635 10 of 10
29. Tuz Johra, F.; Lee, J.-W.; Jung, W.-G. Facile and safe graphene preparation on solution based platform. J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 2014 ,20,
2883–2887. [CrossRef]
30. Vercelli, B.; Donnini, R.; Ghezzi, F.; Sansonetti, A.; Giovanella, U.; La Ferla, B. Nitrogen-doped carbon quantum dots obtained
hydrothermally from citric acid and urea: The role of the speciﬁc nitrogen centers in their electrochemical and optical responses.
Electrochim. Acta 2021 ,387, 138557. [CrossRef]
31. Vercelli, B.; Donnini, R.; Ghezzi, F.; Sansonetti, A.; Giovanella, U.; La Ferla, B. Nitrogen-Doped Carbon Quantum Dots for
Biosensing Applications: The Effect of the Thermal Treatments on Electrochemical and Optical Properties. Molecules 2023 ,28, 72.
[CrossRef]
32. Eaton, D.F. Reference Materials for ﬂuorescence measurements. Pure Appl. Chem. 1988 ,60, 1107–1114. [CrossRef]
33. Grabolle, M.; Spieles, M.; Lesnyak, V .; Gaponik, N.; Eychmüller, A.; Resch-Genger, U. Determination of the Fluorescence Quantum
Yield of Quantum Dots: Suitable Procedures and Achievable Uncertainties. Anal. Chem. 2009 ,81, 6285–6294. [CrossRef]
34. Karstens, T.; Kobs, K. Rhodamine B and rhodamine 101 as reference substances for ﬂuorescence quantum yield measurements. J.
Phys. Chem. 1980 ,84, 1871–1872. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.